Canadian Association of Physicists Part A: Multiple Choice
1999 Prize Exam
Question 1
Thisisathreehourexam. Nationalrankingandprizes The time dependence of the acceleration of a car is as
willbebasedonastudent’sperformanceonbothsectionsA shown. Which time corresponds to the maximum speed of
and B of the exam. However, performance on the multiple the car?
choice questions in part A will be used to determine whose a
written work in part B will be marked for prize consider-
ation by the National Committee. The questions in part
B of the exam have a range of di–culty. Please be careful t t
3 4
to gather as many of the easier marks as possible before t t t
1 2
venturingintomoredi–cultterritory. Insomecasesanan-
swertopart(a)ofaquestionisneededforpart(b). Should
you not be able to solve part (a), assume a likely solution
andattempttherestofthequestionanyway. Nostudentis
expected to completely flnish this exam and parts of each
(a) t
question are very challenging. 1
(b) t
Non-programmable calculators may be used. Please 2
(c) t
be very careful to answer the multiple choice questions on 3
the answer card/sheet provided to you and, most impor- (d) t
4
tantly, write your solutions to the three written problems
on separate sheets as they will be marked by difierent peo- Question 2
ple in difierent parts of Canada. Good luck. Two identical loudspeakers are supplied with identical
sinusoidalsignals. Theyareplacedclosetooneanotherina
Data roomanditisnotedthatthereareregionsofincreasedand
decreased sound intensity in the vicinity of the speakers.
Speed of light c=3:00£108 m/s
Gravitational constant G=6:67£10¡11 Nm2/kg2 Whichofthefollowingactionswillnotchangethispattern?
Radius of Earth R =6:38£106 m (a) Moving one of the speakers.
E
Radius of Moon R =1:70£106 m (b) Changing the amplitude of the signal.
M
Mass of Earth M =5:98£1024 kg
E (c) Changing the frequency of the signal.
Mass of Moon M =7:35£1022 kg
M (d) Replacing the air in the room with Helium gas.
Mass of Sun M =1:99£1030 kg
S
Radius of Moon’s orbit R =3:84£108 m
EM Question 3
Radius of Earth’s orbit R =1:50£1011 m
ES
Acceleration due to gravity g =9:81 m/s2 Two black objects of the same diameter, a sphere and
Fundamental charge e=1:60£10¡19 C a disc, are placed in front of a uniform beam of light. The
Mass of electron m =9:11£10¡31 kg plane of the disc is perpendicular to the light rays. The
e
Mass of proton m =1:673£10¡27 kg force acting upon them by the light is:
p
Mass of neutron m =1:675£10¡27 kg (a) zero
n
Planck’s constant h=6:63£10¡34 Js (b) bigger on the disc.
Coulomb’s constant 1=4…† =8:99£109 Nm2/C2
o (c) bigger on the sphere.
Permeability of free space „ =4…£10¡7 N/A2
o
(d) the same on both.
Speed of sound in air v =340 m/s
s
Density of air ‰=1:2 kg/m3
Boltzmann constant k =1:38£10¡23 J/K Question 4
Absolute zero T =0 K, T =¡273–C A 1 kg mass rests on the ground, at sea-level and at
Energy Conversion 1 cal=4.184 J the equator. What would its weight be if the earth were
Avogadro’s number N =6:02£1023 mol¡1 spinning ten times faster than is presently the case?
A
(a) 9.80 N
(b) 3.37 N
(c) 6.43 N
(d) 9.76 N

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 1999
Question 5 (a) remains less than g at all times.
An ideal Ammeter|a device to measure current in an (b) exceeds g at some point.
electrical circuit|should have an internal resistance which (c) becomes g just before hitting the table.
is,
(d) is constant.
(a) zero.
Question 10
(b) inflnite.
Two 20 g worms climb over a 10 cm high, very thin,
(c) equal to the resistance of the circuit’s load.
wall. One worm is thin and 20 cm long. The other is fat
(d) equal to the internal resistance of the circuit’s power
(butstillthincomparedtoitslength)andonly10cmlong.
source.
What is the ratio of the potential energy of the thin worm
as compared to that of the fat worm when each is half way
Question 6 over the top of the wall?
A 100,000 kg aircraft drops a 1000 kg package of sup- (a) 1:1
plies over an arctic research station. What approximate
(b) 2:1
forceisfeltbythe100kgpilotattheinstantoftherelease?
(c) 2:3
(a) 1 N
(d) 1:2
(b) 10 N
(c) 100 N Question 11
(d) zero Suppose that the \Man Who Skied Down Everest"
went straight down an incline of 40– to the horizontal and
Question 7 subject to a coe–cient of kinetic friction of 0.10. Starting
from rest, how long did it take him to reach a speed of
A converging lens forms an image of an object on a
50 km/hr (Ignore air resistance)?
screen. The image is real and has twice the size of the
object. If the positions of the screen and the object are (a) 2.5 s
interchanged, leaving the lens in its original position, what (b) 9.0 s
is the new image size on the screen?
(c) 1:5£102 s
(a) Twice the object size.
(d) 2.0 s
(b) Same as the object size.
(c) Half the object size. Question 12
A stone is thrown vertically downward from the edge
(d) Can’t say as it depends on the focal length of the lens.
ofaclifiwithaninitialspeedof10m/s. Justbeforehitting
the ground, it has a flnal speed of 30 m/s. If instead, the
Question 8
stonewerethrownhorizontallyoutwardsfromthetopofthe
A bucket full of water is attached to the end of a rope
clifi with the same initial speed as before, what flnal speed
and allowed to swing back and forth as a pendulum from
would it have immediately before hitting the ground?
a flxed support. The bucket has a hole in its bottom that
(a) 10 m/s
allows water to leak out. How does the period of motion
change with the loss of water? (b) 20 m/s
(a) The period does not change. (c) 30 m/s
(b) The period continuously decreases. (d) 40 m/s
(c) The period continuously increases.
Question 13
(d) The period increases to some maximum and then de-
Two objects of equal mass, and heading towards each
creases again.
otherwithequalspeeds,undergoahead-oncollision.Which
of the following statements is correct?
Question 9
(a) Their flnal velocities must be zero.
A pencil is placed vertically on a table top with its
(b) Their flnal velocities may be zero.
pointyendupanditsstickyeraserenddown. Asitfallsover
(c) Each must have a flnal velocity equal to the other’s
from this unstable position, its point of contact with the
initial velocity.
table remains stationary. During its fall, the acceleration
of its tip, (d) Their velocities must be reduced in magnitude.
2

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 1999
Question 14 Question 18
A positive point charge +Q is placed at x = 0 and a A spherical capacitor is formed by two metallic and
negative point charge ¡Q is placed at x = a. The mag- concentric spherical shells. The capacitor is then charged
nitude of the electrostatic force between the two is F. If so that the outer shell carries a positive charge and the
another point charge +Q is paced at x=¡a, the net force innershellcarriesanequalbutnegativecharge. Evenifthe
on the charge at the origin (x=0) is, capacitor is not connected to any circuit, the charge will
eventually leak away due to the small conductivity of the
(a) 2F in the negative x-direction.
material between the shells. What is the character of the
(b) F in the positive x-direction. magnetic fleld induced by this leakage current?
(c) 5F=4 in the positive x-direction. (a) Radially outwards from the inner shell to the outer
(d) 2F in the positive x-direction. shell.
(b) Radiallyinwardsfromtheoutershelltotheinnershell.
Question 15 (c) Circular fleld lines between the shells and perpendicu-
lar to the radial direction.
A simple circuit contains an ideal battery and a resis-
tance R. If a second resistor is placed in parallel with the (d) No magnetic fleld is induced.
flrst,
Question 19
(a) the potential across R will decrease.
Which of the following has units of magnetic fleld?
(b) the current through R will decrease.
(a) kg C¡1 s¡1
(c) the current delivered by the battery will increase.
(b) kg A¡1 s¡1
(d) the power dissipated by R will increase.
(c) N C¡1 m¡1
(d) J A¡1 m¡1
Question 16
A positively charged insulator is brought near (but
Question 20
does not touch) two metallic spheres that are in contact.
Near the geographic north pole is the magnetic north
Themetallicspheresarethenseparated. Thespherewhich
polewhichis, infact, asouthmagneticpole. Atthispoint,
was initially farthest from the insulator will have,
theearth’smagneticfleldpointsstraightdown. Anelectron
(a) no net charge. isprojectedsouthwardsandhorizontallyfromthemagnetic
(b) a negative charge. north pole. The magnetic force on the electron will cause
it to be de(cid:176)ected to the,
(c) a positive charge.
(a) Up
(d) either a positive or negative charge.
(b) Down
(c) East
Question 17
(d) West
A uniform electric fleld is as shown. How many of
the labelled points have the same electric potential as the
Question 21
shaded point?
A difiraction grating has 300 \lines" per mm etched
E
upon it. When light of wavelength 550 nm is normally
incident upon the grating, how many bright spots appear
on a screen a short distance away?
(a) 1
(b) 6
(c) 12
(d) 13
(a) 2
(b) 3
Question 22
(c) 4 A drop of oil (n = 1:4) is on a glass (n = 1:5) sheet
(d) 8 andisobservedfromdirectlyabovebyre(cid:176)ectedwhitelight.
3

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 1999
A number of circular constructive interference bands are Question 25
observed for each colour in the visible spectrum. Approx- In the fllm Armageddon, astronauts land on an aster-
imately how thick is the oil fllm where one observes the oid and are able to walk around \normally" due to the
third blue band from the outside edge of the drop. The gravitation of the large rock. Suppose that a spherical as-
wavelength of blue light may be taken to be ‚ b =450 nm. teroid has a mass M and a radius R. A spherical hole of
observer radius R=2 is excavated from the asteriod as shown. What
isthegravitationalaccelerationatapointonthesurfaceof
the asteroid at a point just above the excavation?
air
oil
R
(a) 482 nm
(b) 675 nm
(c) 1125 nm
(d) 1350 nm
Question 23 (a) GM
R2
A uniform, horizontal beam of light is incident upon (b) GM
2R2
a prism as shown. The prism is in the shape of a quarter- (c) GM
8R2
cylinder,ofradiusR=5cm,andhastheindexofrefraction
(d) 7GM
n=1:5. Apatchonthetabletopforadistancexfromthe 8R2
cylinder is unilluminated. The value of x is,
x
R
(a) 1.71 cm
(b) 2.24 cm
(c) 2.50 cm
(d) 5.00 cm
Question 24
Consider the following types of electromagnetic radi-
ation: radio waves, infra-red, visible light. Which of the
following statements are true?
(i) only radio waves can be used to transmit audio infor-
mation.
(ii) onlyinfra-redradiationisemittedbyveryhotobjects.
(iii) only visible light can be detected by humans.
(a) only i is true.
(b) only ii is true.
(c) only iii is true.
(d) None of the statements are true.
4

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 1999
Part B (c) Remember that the constant force is always acting
upon the flrst bead. What is the time interval be-
tween subsequent collisions between the flrst and sec-
Question 1
ondbeads? Whatthenistheaveragespeedoftheflrst
Fourcharges,eachofcharge+e,areatthefourcorners
bead? What is the speed of the \shock wave" that
of a square of side a=1 cm. The four charges are flxed in
travels down the wire?
place and are considered to be of point-size. Gravity plays
no role in this question. (d) If the whole process is repeated, but with collisions
whichareperfectlyinelastic,whatistheterminalspeed
e+ p+
a of the shock wave formed?
a Question 3
From everyday experience and observations, estimate
the brightness of a full moon as compared to the noon day
p+ e+
sun. Brightnessisdeflnedastheluminousintensityasmea-
sured in units of power per unit area. To arrive at a rea-
(a) Sketchadiagramoftheelectricfleldduetothischarge sonablenumericalestimate, youwillneedtoestimatesome
system. physicalparameters. Itisessentialthatyouexplaintherea-
soningbehindyourestimatesandincludedetaileddrawings
(b) What is the net force acting upon one of the charges? and explanations to support your arguments.
(c) Whatistheelectrostaticpotentialenergyofthischarge
system?
(d) Now suppose that two of the charges are protons and
theothertwoarepositrons. Apositronistheelectron’s
anti-particle. Ithasthesamemassasanelectronbuta
charge of +e. The four charges are suddenly released.
What are their speeds when they are a signiflcant dis-
tance apart from one another?
Question 2
Suppose that we have a string of equally spaced beads
of mass m, their surfaces being separated by a distance
d, that are free to slide without friction on a thin wire.
Suppose that a constant force F acts on the flrst bead,
initially at rest, causing it to accelerate along the wire as
shown. This force acts only on the flrst bead and might be
created by a well directed, steady stream of air. The flrst
bead will collide with the second, which will in turn collide
with the third, and so on. Suppose that all collisions are
elastic.
F
1 d 2 3 4
(a) What is the speed of the flrst bead immediately be-
foreandimmediatelyafteritscollisionwiththesecond
bead?
(b) What is the speed of the second bead immediately be-
fore and immediately after its collision with the third
bead?
5

