Canadian Association of Physicists Part A: Multiple Choice
2000 Prize Exam
Question 1
Thisisathreehourexam. Nationalrankingandprizes
Two high performance bicycle wheels have the same
willbebasedonastudent’sperformanceonbothsectionsA
mass but one is a solid disk and the other is a hoop with
and B of the exam. However, performance on the multiple
very light (as compared to the mass of the rim) spokes.
choice questions in part A will be used to determine whose
Whichwheeltakesthemostenergytoacceleratetoaspeed
written work in part B will be marked for prize consider-
v? Ignore any air and rolling resistances.
ation by the National Committee. The questions in part
(a) The disk wheel requires more energy.
B of the exam have a range of di–culty. Please be careful
to gather as many of the easier marks as possible before (b) The spoked wheel requires more energy.
venturingintomoredi–cultterritory. Insomecasesanan- (c) Both take the same amount of energy.
swertopart(a)ofaquestionisneededforpart(b). Should
(d) It depends on the radius of each wheel.
you not be able to solve part (a), assume a likely solution
andattempttherestofthequestionanyway. Nostudentis
Question 2
expected to completely flnish this exam and parts of each
question are very challenging. An astronaut on a strange planet flnds that the accel-
eration due to gravity is two times greater than that on
Non-programmable calculators may be used. Please
earth. Which of the following could explain this?
be very careful to answer the multiple choice questions on
the answer card/sheet provided to you and, most impor- (a) The mass of the planet is half that of the earth’s but
tantly, write your solutions to the three written problems its radius is the same.
on separate sheets as they will be marked by difierent peo-
(b) The radius of the planet is half that of the earth’s but
ple in difierent parts of Canada. Good luck.
its mass is the same.
(c) Both the mass and the radius are twice the earth’s
Data
values.
Speed of light c=3:00£108 m/s
(d) Both the mass and the radius are half the earth’s val-
Gravitational constant G=6:67£10¡11 Nm2/kg2
ues.
Radius of Earth R =6:38£106 m
E
Radius of Moon R =1:70£106 m
M
Mass of Earth M =5:98£1024 kg Question 3
E
Mass of Moon M =7:35£1022 kg A ball of mass of 10 g is hung from the end of a
M
Mass of Sun M =1:99£1030 kg light vertical spring and set oscillating with an amplitude
S
Radius of Moon’s orbit R =3:84£108 m of 10 cm. The period of the oscillation is 1 s. If the ball
EM
Radius of Earth’s orbit R =1:50£1011 m is now replaced by another with a mass of 40 g and again
ES
Acceleration due to gravity g =9:81 m/s2 set oscillating with the same amplitude, its new period of
Fundamental charge e=1:60£10¡19 C oscillation will be,
Mass of electron m =9:11£10¡31 kg
e (a) 1 s.
Mass of proton m =1:673£10¡27 kg
p
Mass of neutron m =1:675£10¡27 kg (b) 2 s.
n
Planck’s constant h=6:63£10¡34 Js (c) 4 s.
Coulomb’s constant 1=4…† o =8:99£109 Nm2/C2 (d) 8 s.
Permeability of free space „ =4…£10¡7 N/A2
o
Speed of sound in air v =340 m/s
s Question 4
Density of air ‰=1:2 kg/m3
Boltzmann constant k =1:38£10¡23 J/K Thehumanearcanal,whichisopentotheatmosphere
Absolute zero T =0 K, T =¡273–C and ends at the ear drum, is about 3 cm long. Which of
Energy Conversion 1 eV=1:6£10¡19 J the following is the best approximation to the fundemental
Avogadro’s number N =6:02£1023 mol¡1 resonant frequency of the ear canal?
A
(a) 1,500 Hz
(b) 3,000 Hz
(c) 6,000 Hz
(d) 11,000 Hz

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 2000
Question 5 Question 9
A metal ball is connected to the ground with a wire In photographic darkrooms, the only source of light is
via a switch. The switch is initally closed (i.e.the ball is usuallyaredlightbulb. Afterspendingtimeinadarkroom,
connected to ground) while a charge +Q is brought close aperson’seyebecomesadjustedtothelightbuteverything
to the ball (but not touching). While the charge is near appearstobeinblackandwhite. Sincearedsurfacere(cid:176)ects
the ball, the switch is opened and then the charge is taken all red light, it will appear \white". Which of the following
away. The charge on the ball is now, colours will appear to be the brightest?
(a) zero. (a) Green
(b) positive. (b) Blue
(c) negative. (c) Purple
(d) unchanged from its initial charge. (d) Black
Question 6 Question 10
In the light from a distant star, a particular spectral Millikan’soildropexperimentattemptstomeasurethe
lineisobserved. Thewavelengthofthislinevariesbetween charge on a single electron, e, by measuring the charge on
being about 2% shorter than the same line as observed in tiny oil drops suspended in an electrostatic fleld. It is as-
an earth based laboratory, and about 2% longer. Which of sumedthatthechargeontheoildropsisduetojustasmall
the following best describes the star. number of excess electrons. The charges 3:90£10¡19 C,
6:50£10¡19 C, and 9:10£10¡19 C are measured on three
(a) The star is moving away from the earth.
drops of oil. The charge of an electron is deduced to be,
(b) The star is moving towards the earth.
(a) 1:3£10¡19 C.
(c) The star is very, very massive as compared to the sun.
(b) 1:6£10¡19 C.
(d) Thestarisorbitingaboutsomemassivehiddenobject.
(c) 2:6£10¡19 C.
(d) 3:9£10¡19 C.
Question 7
A metal bar rotates about a vertical axis which passes
Question 11
through the center of the bar. The axis of rotation is per-
Two mirrors are joined together so that they make an
pendicular to the length of the bar. There is a uniform
angle of 60– as shown.
magnetic fleld in the vertical direction. The emf (or po-
tential difierence) induced between the two ends of the bar
is,
(a) zero.
P
(b) a sinusoidally oscillating value. 60°(cid:13)
(c) a non-zero positive value.
(d) a non-zero negative value.
Question 8
ApersonstandsatapointP whichisonthelinewhich
A projector shows an image which is in focus but too bisectsthe60– angle. Howmanyimagesofherselfdoesthe
largeforthescreenonwhichitisshown. Sincetheprojector person see?
and the screen are flxed in place, the projectionist must,
(a) 1
(a) adjust the projector’s lens by moving it closer to the
(b) 3
screen.
(c) 6
(b) adjust the projector’s lens by moving it farther from
(d) inflnite number
the screen.
(c) replace the projector’s lens with one having a shorter
focal length.
(d) replace the projector’s lens with one having a longer
focal length.
2

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 2000
Question 12 (a) 0.01 s
(b) 0.10 s
Consider a roller coaster with a loop-the-loop. The
loop is not circular (that would be too dangerous) but has (c) 0.50 s
a radius of curvature which decreases with height. A roller (d) 1.00 s
coaster car starts from rest from the top of a hill which is
5 m higher than the top of the loop. It rolls down the hill Question 16
and through the loop. What must the radius of curvature
Acircuitiscomprisedof8identicalbatteriesconnected
at the top of the loop be so that the passengers of the car
in series as shown.
willfeel, atthatpoint, asiftheyhavetheirnormalweight?
(a) 5 m
(b) 10 m V
(c) 15 m
(d) 20 m
Each battery has an emf of 1.5 V and an internal
Question 13 resistance of 0.2 ›. What is the reading on a voltmeter
connected across any one of the batteries?.
Two identical conducting balls have positive charges
q 6=q respectively. Theballsarebroughttogethersothat (a) 0.0
1 2
they touch and then put back in their original positions. (b) 1.3 V
The force between the balls is,
(c) 1.5 V
(a) The same as it was before the balls touched. (d) 12 V
(b) Greater than before the balls touched.
Question 17
(c) Less than before the balls touched.
EachbranchinthefollowingcircuithasaresistanceR.
(d) Zero.
Question 14
A B
Helium4Hebecomesasuper(cid:176)uidattemperaturesT <
2
2:18K.Asuper(cid:176)uid(cid:176)owswithnoviscosity. Thisbehaviour
can only be explained using quantum physics and it can
onlyhappenifthedeBrogliewavelengthofaheliumatom,
Theequivalentresistanceofthethecircuitbetweenthe
ofmassm,iscomparabletotheinter-atomicspacingofthe
points A and B is,
(cid:176)uid. Which of the following could be an expression for ‚,
(a) R
the de Broglie wavelength?
p (b) 2R
(a) ‚=h= 3mkT
p (c) 4R
(b) ‚= 3mkT=rh
p (d) 8R
(c) ‚= h=3mkT
p
Question 18
(d) ‚=3mkT= h
Which of the following statements is true concerning
the elastic collision of two objects?
Question 15
(a) Noworkisdoneonanyofthetwoobjects,sincethere
Inagameofegg-toss,twoplayerstossaneggbackand is no external force.
forthbetweenthemwhilemovingfartherandfartherapart.
(b) Theworkdonebytheflrstobjectonthesecondisequal
Theloseristhepersonwhobreakstheeggwhencatchingit.
to the work done on the second by the flrst.
The force required to break an egg’s shell is about 5 N and
a typical egg has a mass of about 50 g. If the players are (c) The work done by the flrst object on the second is
10 m apart, and the eggs are thrown with initial velocities exactly the opposite of the work done on the second
directed at 45– above the horizontal, what is the shortest by the flrst.
time that a player can take to arrest the motion of the egg (d) The work done on the system depends on the angle of
so as not to break it? collision.
3

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 2000
Question 19 (a) Yes
Which of the following statements is false? (b) Yes, but only if „ k mgcos(cid:181) <mgsin(cid:181)
(a) The momentum of a heavy object is greater than that (c) Yes, but only if „ k mgcos(cid:181) >mgsin(cid:181)
of a light object moving at the same speed. (d) No
(b) In a perfectly inelastic collision, all the initial kinetic
energy of the colliding bodies is dissipated. Question 23
(c) The momentum of a system of colliding bodies may A proton is moving with a speed of u directly towards
be conserved even though the total mechanical energy an alpha-particle (Helium nucleus) which, when the two
may not. particleswereveryfarapartfromoneanother,wasinitially
(d) The velocity of the center of mass of a system is the atrest. Whatistheseparationoftheparticlesattheirpoint
system’s total momentum divided by its total mass. of closest approach? You may assume that m fi =4m p .
(a) r =e2=…† m u2
o p
Question 20
(b) r =e2=4…† m u2
Which of the following statements is true? o p
(c) r =5e2=4…† m u2
(a) The observed doppler shift for sound waves depends o p
(d) r =5e2=8…† m u2
only on the relative motion of the source and the re- o p
ceiver.
Question 24
(b) Only transverse waves can difiract.
(c) Two wave sources that are out of phase by 180– are Red light from a HeNe laser has a wavelength of
630 nm. If it is normally incident upon an optical difirac-
incoherent.
tiongratingwith2000linespercentimeter,howmanymax-
(d) Interference patterns are only observed for coherent
ima (including the central maximum) may be observed on
sources.
a screen which is far from the grating?
Question 21 (a) 14
An airplane circumnavigates the globe by (cid:176)ying above (b) 15
the equator and at a constant altitude above sea level. If (c) 16
the plane repeats the journey but (cid:176)ies at an altitude which
(d) 17
is 1000 m higher than before, how much larger a distance
through the atmosphere does the plane travel as compared
Question 25
to the flrst time?
(a) 6.283 km Which of the following statements is true?
(b) 62.83 km (a) The capacitance of a capacitor is the total amount of
(c) 628.3 km charge it can store.
(d) 6283 km (b) The equivalent capacitance of two capacitors in series
is the sum of the two capacitances.
Question 22 (c) A dielectric material inserted between the conductors
A block of mass m is at rest on an inclined plane. The of a capacitor increases its capacitance.
coe–cients of static and kinetic friction between the block (d) The electrostatic energy stored by a capacitor is equal
andtheplaneare„ s and„ k <„ s . Theanglethattheplane to the ratio of the charge on either conductor to the
makes with the horizontal satisfles tan(cid:181) = „ s . A string is potential difierence between the conductors.
attached to the block. Is it possible to pull on the string in
such a way that the block will slide with constant velocity
along a horizontal line? That is to say, can the block slide
along a line of constant elevation?
4

Canadian Association of Physicists Prize Exam 2000
Part B (b) If a wind v blows from the west (i.e.to the east), flnd
w
the time that the plane would take for a round trip
Problem 1 from town A to B and back again. Show that it is
greater than T.
A mass spectrometer measures the mass of ions. An
ionisacceleratedtoahighspeedandinjectedintoaregion (c) If a wind v blows from the south (i.e.to the north),
w
withauniformmagneticfleldwhichisperpendiculartothe sketch a diagram showing the heading that the plane
ion’s velocity. The ion will follow a curved trajectory and must (cid:176)y so as to (cid:176)y in a straight line from town A to
impact a photographic plate some distance away from the town B. Again, flnd the round trip time for (cid:176)ying in
injection point. By measuring this distance, the ion’s mass such a cross wind.
can be deduced.
(d) Show that regardless of the wind direction, the round
B triptimefora(cid:176)ightfromtownAtoB andbackagain
O P
is longer than if there was no wind whatsoever. Find
film
anexpressionfortheroundtriptimeifawindv blows
w
v
in an arbitrary direction.
m , q
Problem 3
Suppose singly charged (q = +e) ions of 39K and 41K
19 19 Leonardo da Vinci was commissioned by the Duke of
are accelerated to an energy of 500 eV and injected into a
Milan to construct a Bronze statue as a tribute to his late
magnetic fleld B = 0:7 T. The velocity of the ions upon
father. The proposed size was to be twenty three feet tall
enteringthemagneticfleldisperpendiculartothelineOP.
and weigh 80 tons (73,000 kg). For this task Leonardo
(a) Whatspeeddoeachoftheionshavewhentheyimpact had to develop new casting methods to construct this mas-
the photographic plate at a point P? sive statue. By 1499 the French invaded Milan and he had
onlycompleteda22-footclaymodelwhichwasusedbythe
(b) What is the shape of the trajectory for the ions? Find
French soldiers for target practice. The project was never
the distance OP for each of the two ions.
completed.
(c) In reality, things are not quite so simple. Variations
Heavystatuesneedtobeplaceduponverystrongcon-
in the ions’ velocities can cause problems with the res-
crete pedestals. The compressive strength of high strength
olution of the machine. If the initial energy of the concrete ranges from 10 { 70 N/mm2. Lets take a typi-
ions cannot be held precisely at 500 eV, there will be
cal high-strength concrete with a compressive strength of
a small variation in the distances OP. Suppose that s = 50 N/mm2 and a density of ‰ = 1250 kg/m3. This
the energy of the ions is 500§5 eV. Can the two ions
concrete will crumble if a pressure of greater than this is
be distinguished from one another when they hit the
applied.
screen?
(a) Suppose Leonardo’s statue (a horse with four feet
(d) Suppose that the velocity of the ions when they enter
touchingtheground)istobeplacedonsuchaconcrete
themagneticfleldcannotbeheldperpendiculartothe
pedestal. What must be the minimum area of each of
line OP. If there is a small variation of §fi about a
the horse’s feet so as not to damage the pedestal?
perpendicular injection angle, flnd the variation in the
length of OP. Can the two ions be distinguished from (b) Now, more generally, what is the maximum height of
one another if fi=3–? a conical mountain made of high strength concrete?
(c) Finally, outline the design constraints that go into
Problem 2 making a free standing concrete structure with the
A town B is directly east of a town A. The two towns maximum possible height.
areadistanceLapart. Intheabsenceofanywind, aplane
can (cid:176)y from town A to B in a time T. The speed of the
airplane, v =L=T is called the plane’s air-speed. Assume
o
in all that follows that the plane always has the same air-
speed. If the plane (cid:176)ys with a tail wind of speed v , then
w
itwillhaveaspeedwithrespecttotheground,v givenby
g
v =v +v . This is called the plane’s ground-speed.
g o w
(a) Explain how the plane could have a ground-speed of
zero.
5

