CanadianAssociationofPhysicists Question2
2001PrizeExam The diagram below shows various positions of a child in
motiononaswing. Somewhereinfrontofthechildastation-
This is a three hour exam. National ranking and prizes arywhistleisblowing. Atwhichpositionwillthechildhear
willbebasedonastudent’sperformanceonbothsectionsA thehighestfrequencyforthesoundofthewhistle?
and B of the exam. However, performance on the multiple
choice questions in part A will be used to determine whose
writtenworkinpartBwillbemarkedforprizeconsideration
by the National Committee. The questions in part B of the
A
exam have a range of difficulty. Please be careful to gather
asmanyoftheeasiermarksaspossiblebeforeventuringinto
B moredifficultterritory. Ifananswertopart(a)ofaquestion
isneededforpart(b), andyouarenotabletosolvepart(a),
assumealikelysolutionandattempttherestofthequestion
anyway. No student is expected to complete this exam and
partsofeachproblemmaybeverychallenging.
Non-programmable calculators may be used. Please
be very careful to answer the multiple choice ques-
tions on the answer card/sheet provided; most im-
portantly, write your solutions to the three written
problems on separate sheets as they will be marked
by people in different parts of Canada. Good luck.
Data
Speedoflight c=3.00×108m/s
Gravitationalconstant G=6.67×10−11N·m2/kg2
Accelerationduetogravity g =9.80m/s2
Fundamentalcharge e=1.60×10−19C
Massofelectron m =9.11×10−31kg
e
Massofproton m =1.673×10−27kg
p
Planck’sconstant h=6.63×10−34J·s
Coulomb’sconstant 1/4π(cid:15) =8.99×109J·m/C2
o
Permeabilityoffreespace µ =4π×10−7N/A2
o
Speedofsoundinair v =343m/s
s
Densityofair ρ=1.2kg/m3
Boltzmannconstant k =1.38×10−23J/K
EnergyConversion 1eV=1.6×10−19J
Avogadro’snumber N =6.02×1023mol−1
A
PartA:MultipleChoice
Question1
Three identical resistors are connected across a voltage
source V so that one of them is in parallel with two others
whichareconnectedinseries. Thepowerdissipatedthrough
thefirstone,comparedtothepowerdissipatedbyeachofthe
othertwo,isapproximately
(a) thesame.
(b) halfasmuch.
(c) twiceasmuch.
(d) fourtimesasmuch.
(cid:0)
D
C
(cid:1)
whistle
(a) AtBwhenmovingtowardA.
(b) AtBwhenmovingtowardC.
(c) AtCwhenmovingtowardB.
(d) AtCwhenmovingtowardD.
Question3
In a Young double slit experiment, green light is incident
on the two slits. The interference pattern is observed on a
screen. Whichoneofthefollowingchangeswouldcausethe
observedfringestobemorecloselyspaced?
incoming
screen(cid:13)
(cid:0) (cid:13)
light w (cid:1)
fringes(cid:13)
aves(cid:13)
(a) Reducingtheseparationbetweentheslits.
(b) Usingbluelightinsteadofgreenlight.
(c) Usingredlightinsteadofgreenlight.
(d) Movingthelightsourcefurtherawayfromtheslits.
Question4
Athinlenswithfocallengthf istobeusedasamagnify-
ing glass. Which of the following statements regarding this
situationistrue?
(a) Aconverginglensmustbeused,andtheobjectbeplaced
atadistancegreaterthan2f fromthelens.
(b) Adiverginglensmustbeused,andtheobjectbeplaced
betweenf and2f fromthelens.
(c) Aconverginglensmustbeused,andtheobjectbeplaced
atadistancelessthanf fromthelens.
(d) Adiverginglensmustbeused,andtheobjectbeplaced
atanypointotherthanthefocalpoint.

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2001
Question5
The figure shows the path of a ray of light as it passes
through three different materials with refractive indices n ,
1
n and n . The figure is drawn to scale. What can we con-
2 3
cludeconcerningtheindicesofthesethreematerials?
n
1
n
2
n
3
(a) n <n <n .
3 2 1
(b) n <n <n .
3 1 2
(c) n <n <n .
2 1 3
(d) n <n <n .
1 3 2
Question6
The diagram shows the trajectory of three artillery shells.
Eachwasfiredwiththesameinitialspeed. Whichshellwas
intheairforthelongesttime? (Ignoreairfriction.)
A (cid:0) (cid:13)
B(cid:13)
C (cid:1)
Question8
Two test charges are brought successively to a position
some distance away from a negative charge −Q. First, test-
charge q is placed at a distance R from −Q. Then it is re-
movedandatest-charge−2qisplacedatadistance2Rfrom
−Q. Thesignofq isunknown. Comparedwiththeelectric
potentialatthepositionofthetest-chargeinthefirstcase,the
electricpotentialatthepositionofthesecondtest-chargeis
– Q q – Q – 2q
R(cid:13) 2R(cid:13)
(a) (b)
(a) thesame.
(b) twiceaslarge.
(c) halfaslarge.
(d) impossibletodetermineunlessthesignofqisknown.
Question9
Asimplependulum, consistingofamassm attheendof
an unstretchable string of length L, swings upward, making
anangleθwiththevertical. Theworkdonebythetensionin
thestringis
(a) Zero.
(b) mgL
(c) mgL cos θ
(d) -mgL sin θ
(cid:13)
(a) ShellA.
Question10
(b) ShellB.
Inproblemsinvolvingelectromagnetismitisoftenconve-
(c) ShellC. nient and informative to express answers in terms of a con-
(d) ShellsAandCwereintheairforequaltime,whichwas stant, α, which is a combination of the Coulomb constant,
longerthanforshellB. k = 1/4π(cid:15) , the charge of the electron, e, and ¯h = h/2π,
e 0
h being Planck’s constant. For instance, the lowest energy
that a hydrogenatom can have is given by E = −1α2mc2,
2
where m is the mass of the electron and c is the speed of
Question7 light. Whichofthefollowingisthecorrectexpressionforα?
LetV beelectricpotentialandEthemagnitudeoftheelec- (HINT: non-relativistic kinetic energy is 1mv2, where v is
2
tric field. At a given position, which of the following state- speed.)
mentsistrue?
k e2 ¯h
(a) e . (b) .
(a) E isalwayszerowhereV iszero. ¯hc k e e2c
(b) V isalwayszerowhereE iszero. k e2¯h k e2c
e e
(c) . (d)
(c) E canbezerowhereV isnonzero. c ¯h
(d) E isalwaysnonzerowhereV isnonzero.
2

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2001
Question11 Question14
A mass suspended from a spring is oscillating up and A vertical spring with constant 250 N/m and negligible
down. Considerthefollowingtwostatements: massisattachedtoahorizontalplate. Ablockofmass0.255
kg is dropped onto the spring which compresses by 0.12 m
(1) Atsomepointduringtheoscillation, themasshaszero
beforecomingmomentarilytorest. Thefollowingtwonum-
velocitybutitisaccelerating.
bers are the work done by the force of gravity, W , and the
g
(2) Atsomepointduringtheoscillation, themasshaszero
work done by the spring, W , (both over the total distance
s
velocityandzeroacceleration.
thatthespringiscompressed).
(a) Bothoccuratsometimeduringtheoscillation. (a) W =0.30J,W =−1.8J.
g s
(b) Neitheroccursduringtheoscillation. (b) W =0.30J,W =1.8J.
g s
(c) Only(1)occurs. (c) W =−0.30J,W =1.8J.
g s
(d) Only(2)occurs. (d) W =−0.30J,W =−1.8J.
g s
Question15
Question12
Astoneofmassmisattachedtoalightstrongstringand
A very long solenoid perpendicular to the page generates
whirledinaverticalcircleofradiusr. Attheexactbottomof
adownwardmagneticfieldwhosemagnitudeincreaseswith
thepath,thetensioninthestringisthreetimestheweightof
time. Thisinducesanemfinaconductingwirelooparound
thestone. Thestone’sspeedatthatpointisgivenby
thesolenoidwhichlightstwoidenticalbulbsconnectedinse-
√
riesalongthewire.Nowtwopointsdiametricallyopposedon (a) 2 gr
√
thewireloopareshortedwithanotherwirelyingtotheright (b) 2gr
√
ofbulbBintheplaneofthepage. Aftertheshortingwireis (c) 3gr
inserted,
(d) 4gr
Question16
Youarerapidlypumpingairintoatirewithabicyclepump.
At the same time, helium gas is rapidly escaping out of a
A B balloon. Whichofthefollowingstatementsistrue?
(a) Thepumpcoolsdownwhiletheheliumgaswarmsupas
itisexpelled.
(b) Thepumpwarmsupwhiletheheliumgascoolsdownas
itisexpelled.
(c) The pump cools down while the helium gas also cools
(a) bulbAgoesout,andbulbBdims. downasitisexpelled.
(b) bulbAgoesout,andbulbBgetsbrighter. (d) Thepumpwarmsupswhiletheheliumhasalsowarms
(c) bulbBgoesout,andbulbAdims. upasitisexpelled.
(d) bulbBgoesout,andbulbAgetsbrighter.
Question17
Aparticle,movingthroughacertainregionofspace,expe-
Question13
riencesanon-zeromagneticforce. Whichofthefollowingis
A quantity of charge, Q, is distributed uniformly through
possible?
asphereofradiusR. Asmallersphere,ofradiusdandcon-
centricwiththelargesphere,isnowremovedfromit,leaving (a) A magnetic field exists in that region and changes the
asphericalcavitywithnochargeinit. Thechargedensityof speedoftheparticle.
theremainingshellhasnotchanged. Theelectrostaticpoten- (b) A magnetic field exists in this region and the particle’s
tialatadistancer >R,outsidetheshell,is velocityvectorisparalleltothemagneticfieldvector.
1 Qr3 1 QR3−d3 (c) Amagneticfieldexistsinthisregionandtheparticleis
(a) (b) movingatrightangletothemagneticfield.
4π(cid:15) r d3 4π(cid:15) r R3
0 0
(d) Amagneticfieldexistsinthisregionandtheparticleis
1 QR3 1 Q d3
(c) (d) moving in the direction opposite to the magnetic field
4π(cid:15) r d3 4π(cid:15) r R3
0 0 vector.
3

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2001
Question18 Question23
The astronauts aboard a Space Shuttle in circular orbit Auniformpoleisattachedtoaverticalwallbyafriction-
aroundtheEarthwishtotransfertheshuttletoanewcircular lesspivot. Thepoleisheldhorizontalbyaverticalcableat-
orbitathigheraltitude. Inthisneworbit,theshuttlewillhave tached to the ceiling as shown. Considering torques on the
poleabouttheaxisofthepivot,whichoneofthestatements
(a) asmallerorbitalspeedandalargertotalenergy.
belowthefigureiscorrect?
(b) asmallerorbitalspeedandasmallertotalenergy.
(c) alargerorbitalspeedandalargertotalenergy.
(d) alargerorbitalspeedandasmallertotalenergy.
cable
Question19
Acarpushesastalledtruckupahill.Thecarexertsaforce pivot
of magnitude F 1 on the truck. The truck exerts a force of pole
magnitudeF onthecar. Then
2
(a) F =F sincetheseforcesformanaction-reactionpair.
1 2 (a) The magnitude of the torque due to the tension in the
(b) F =F onlyifthecarandtruckdonotaccelerate.
1 2 cableisequaltothemagnitudeofthetorqueduetothe
(c) F >F ,orelsethecarandthetruckwouldnotmove.
1 2 weightofthepole.
(d) F <F becausethetruckisheavier.
1 2 (b) The magnitude of the torque due to the tension in the
cableisgreaterthanthemagnitudeofthetorquedueto
theweightofthepole.
Question20
Aconvexmirrorhasitscentreofcurvaturelocatedbehind (c) The magnitude of the torque due to the tension in the
themirror. Theimageformedbysuchamirroris cableislessthanthemagnitudeofthetorqueduetothe
weightofthepole.
(a) upsidedown,enlargedandvirtual.
(d) The tension in the cable is equal to the weight of the
(b) upsidedown,reducedandvirtual.
pole.
(c) rightsideup. reducedandreal.
(d) rightsideup,reducedandvirtual.
. Question24
Theminimumspeedwithrespecttoairthataparticularjet
Question21 aircraftmusthaveinordertokeepaloftis300km/hr.Suppose
Atoyairplaneistravellinginahorizontalcircleatacon- thatasitspilotpreparestotakeoff,thewindblowseastward
stantspeedattheendofatetherwire. Themagnitudeofthe atagroundspeedthatcanvarybetween0and30km/hr. Ig-
tensioninthewireisF. Thenthewireisplayedouttotwice noring any other fact, a safe procedure to follow, consistent
its original length and the plane is made to fly at twice its withusingupaslittlefuelaspossible,isto
originalspeed. Thetensioninthewireisnow
(a) takeoffeastwardatagroundspeedof320km/hr.
(a) 1F
4 (b) takeoffwestwardatagroundspeedof320km/hr.
(b) 1F
2 (c) takeoffwestwardatagroundspeedof300km/hr.
(c) F
(d) takeoffwestwardatagroundspeedof280km/hr.
(d) 2F
Question22 Question25
The plates of a parallel-plate capacitor are separated by a A mass m is moving at speed v perpendicular to a rod of
soliddielectric. Thiscapacitorandaresistorareconnectedin lengthdandmassM = 6mwhichpivotsaroundafriction-
seriesacrosstheterminalsofabattery. Nowtheplatesofthe less axle running through its centre. It strikes and sticks to
capacitorarepulledslightlyfartherapart. Whenequilibrium the end of the rod. The moment of inertia of the rod about
isrestoredinthecircuit, itscentreisMd2/12. Thentheangularspeedofthesystem
rightafterthecollisionis
(a) thepotentialdifferenceacrosstheplateshasincreased.
(b) theenergystoredonthecapacitorhasincreased. (a) 2v/3d.
(c) thecapacitanceofthecapacitorhasincreased. (b) 2v/d.
(d) thechargeontheplatesofthecapacitorhasdecreased.
(c) v/d.
(d) 3v/2d.
4

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2001
PartB
Problem1
Supposethatinitiallythesystemofmassesshownbelowis
heldmotionless. Allsurfacesarefrictionless,andthepulley
isfixedtomassM. Thestringiscompletelyinextensible: its
length is constant. We are interested in the acceleration of
each mass at the instant right after they are released. Note
thatatthisinstantthestringholdingm isstillvertical.
2
M (cid:0)
m
1
m
2 (cid:1)
(b) Suppose that the acceleration imparted to the bottle by
the escaping gas and that you calculated in part (a) re-
mainsthesameuntiltheairhasfinishedescapingatthe
constantrate∆M/∆t.Whatwouldbethetotaldistance
coveredbythebottlewhenitfinallycomestoastop?
(c) NOTE: BONUS marks will be awarded if you can de-
rive the following expression for the maximum speed
the bottle can ever attain once all the air has escaped,
and which does n(cid:127)ot assume that the acceleration of the
bottleisconstantwhiletheairisescaping:
m µg/2M
v = u − f (M2−M2)
f M (∆M/∆t) f i
f
where m is the mass of the escaped air, neglecting the
airleftinthebottleattheend.
(a) Draw free-body diagrams showing and labelling all
forces that act on the three masses at the instant right Problem3
aftertheyarereleased. Consider a long horizontal cylindrical shell, of length l,
(b) Write Newton’s second law as it applies to each mass. radius R which can rotate freely about its longitudinal axis
ExplainbrieflywhyM accelerates. with a moment of inertia I. The material that composes it
iselectricallyinsulatingandnon-magnetic. Amasslessstring
(c) LetAbetheaccelerationofmassM,a thatofm ,and
1 1 attachedtoaverticallyhangingmassmisthenwoundaround
a thatofm . Findarelationbetweentheaccelerations
2 2 the cylinder drum. The mass is released from rest at time
ofthethreemasses.
t=0.
(d) DeterminethetensionT inthestringandthethreeaccel-
erations in terms of the masses and of the gravitational (a) Determinetheangularaccelerationandkineticenergyof
acceleration,g. the system after the hanging mass has fallen a distance
h.
(e) Take the limits of your results in part (d) as M → ∞.
Whatdotheybecomeifinsteadyoutakem → 0,orif (b) A net amount of positive charge Q, of negligible mass,
1
youtakem → 0(notbothatthesametime)? Doyour is deposited uniformly on the outside drum of the shell
2
resultsmakesenseinallthoselimits? before the mass is released. Redo part (a) under these
conditions. Calculate the difference in kinetic energy
betweenthetwocasesQ = 0andQ (cid:54)= 0. Doyouhave
anyideaastowherethe“missing”kineticenergywent?
Problem2
A100kg(whenempty)cylindricalbottleofgas,contain- HINT: The magnetic field due to a very long solenoid of
ing100lofairatapressureof100atmospheres,fallsoveron length l and N turns carrying a current I produces no net
the lab floor, breaking the valve. This leaves a circular hole magnetic field outside the solenoid, but a net uniform mag-
ofradius2.0cmattheendofthebottle,throughwhichtheair neticfieldofstrengthµ NI/l insidethesolenoid. Thefield
0
escapesinadirectionparalleltothelongaxisofthebottle. isdirectedalongthesolenoidaxis.
(a) Letubetheexhaustspeedoftheairrelativetothelab,
assumedtobeconstant,andM ,M theinitialandfinal
i f
massofthebottle,respectively. Thebottleslidesacross
afloorwithakineticcoefficientoffrictionµ=0.15.
Calculate∆M/∆t,themaximumrateatwhichthemass
of the bottle changes if u is limited by the speed of
sound, approximately equal to 343 m/s. HINT: under
ourassumptions,∆M/∆tisconstant,andtheescaping
air(asopposedtotheairstillinthebottle)hasadensity
of1.2kg/m3.
Write down the fundamental conservation law which
governs the motion of the bottle. Calculate its accel-
erationastheairstartsescaping.
5

