Canadian Association of Physicists Question2
2002 Prize Exam A demonstration apparatus sits on a table in the lab. It con-
sists of a metal track (shown as a thick solid line in the fig-
This is a three hour exam. National ranking and prizes will urebelow)alongwhichaperfectlysphericalmarblecanroll
bebasedonastudent’sperformanceonbothsectionsAand withoutslipping. Inonerun,themarbleisreleasedfromrest
Boftheexam. However,performanceonthemultiplechoice at a height h above the table on the left section, rolls down
questions in part A will be used to determine whose written one side and then up the other side without slipping, briefly
workinpartBwillbemarkedforprizeconsiderationbythe stopping when it has reached h 1 . Assuming the table to be
National Committee. The questions in part B of the exam horizontalandneglectingairdragaswellasanyenergyloss
havearangeofdifficulty. Dobecarefultogatherasmanyof duetorolling,
theeasiermarksaspossiblebeforeventuringintomorediffi-
cultterritory. Ifananswertopart(a)ofaquestionisneeded
for part (b), and you are not able to solve part (a), assume a
h
likely solution and attempt the rest of the question anyway. h
q f 1
No student is expected to complete this exam and parts of
eachproblemmaybeverychallenging.
Non-programmablecalculatorsmaybeused. Pleasebevery (a) h < h always, becausethe frictionthat keeps theball
1
careful to answer the multiple choice questions on the an- rollingmustdissipateenergy.
swer card/sheet provided; most importantly, write your so-
(b) h =h,sincetotalmechanicalenergyisconserved.
1
lutions to the three written problems on separate sheets as
(c) h =honlyiftiltanglesφandθareequal.
they will be marked by people in different parts of Canada. 1
Goodluck. (d) h =honlyiftiltangleφislargerthanθ.
1
Data
Question3
Speedoflight c=3.00×108m/s
In the movie Jurassic Park, as a jeep is being pursued by a
Gravitationalconstant G=6.67×10−11N·m2/kg2
dinosaur, onecanseetheanimalinthejeep’ssiderear-view
Accelerationduetogravity g =9.80m/s2
mirroronwhichisprinted: “Objectsinmirrorarecloserthan
Fundamentalcharge e=1.60×10−19C
theyappear.” Then,
Massofelectron m =9.11×10−31kg
e
Massofproton m p =1.673×10−27kg (a) themirrorisflat.
Coulomb’sconstant 1/4π(cid:15) =8.99×109J·m/C2
o (b) themirrorisconcave.
Permeabilityoffreespace µ =4π×10−7N/A2
o
(c) themirrorisconvex.
Speedofsoundinair v =343m/s
s
Indexofrefractionofwater n =1.33 (d) themirrorcouldbeeitherconvexorconcave.
w
Energyconversion 1eV=1.6×10−19J
Question4
Alumpofstickychewing-gumwithmassmmovesatspeed
PartA:MultipleChoice
v toward another lump of mass M at rest. They collide
and stick together, both moving at speed V. Nothing else
Question1 isknownabouttheconditionsunderwhichthecollisiontakes
Alittlegirlisholdingahelium-filledballoononastringwhile place. Whichofthefollowingstatementsisthemostcorrect?
ridinginaclosedelevatorgoingdownaverytallbuildingat
(a) Neither total kinetic energy nor total linear momentum
constant speed. The elevator shaft is maintained under vac-
canbeconserved.
uum. Suddenlytheelevatorcablesnaps,sendingtheelevator
(b) This is an elastic collision in which both total kinetic
intofreefall. Inhersurprisethegirlletsgoofthestring. She
energy and total linear momentum are conserved; the
isevenmoresurprisedtosee
finalspeedisV =v/2.
(a) theballoonrising.
(c) Thisisaninelasticcollision,andinsuchcollisions,total
(b) theballoonfloatingdownward. linearmomentumisalwaysconserved; thefinalspeed
isV =v/4.
(c) theballoonremainingstationary.
(d) This is an inelastic collision in which total linear mo-
(d) the balloon bouncing slowly between the floor and the
mentum is conserved, provided no external force can
ceiling.
deliveranimpulsetothesystemduringthecollision.

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2002
Question5 Question10
AccordingtotheArchimedesprinciple, At the shallow end of a swimming pool, the water is 70.0
cm deep. The diameter of the cone of light emerging from
(a) abodyimmersedinafluidexperiencesanupwardforce
the water into the air above, emitted by a light source 10.0
equaltotheweightofthefluiditdisplaces.
cmindiameteratthebottomofthepoolandmeasuredbyan
(b) abodyimmersedinafluidexperiencesanupwardforce observerontheedgeofthepool2.50maway,is’
equaltotheweightoftheobject.
(a)1.60m. (b)1.70m.
(c) abodyimmersedinafluiddisplacesanamountoffluid
(c)1.75m. (d)1.80m.
equaltothevolumeofthebody.
(d) a body immersed in a liquid floats only if its density is
smallerthanthatoftheliquid. Question11
Oftwoquantitiesofwaterandsteam,bothat100◦Candhav-
Question6 ingthesamemass, inimmediatecontactwiththesamearea
A guitar string of length L, with both of its ends fixed, is ofyourskin,whichislikeliesttocauseamoresevereburn?
vibrating,producingasoundcomposedofafundamentalfre-
(a)Thesteam. (b)Thereisnodifference.
quency and its integer multiples (harmonics). To emphasize
all the even-numbered harmonics at the expense of the odd- (c)Thewater. (d)Itdependsonthesteam’spressure.
numbered ones, the furthest distance away from either end
whereoneshouldholddownthestringis
Question12
(a)L/2. (b)L/3. A varying electric current running through a coiled wire in-
(c)L/4. (d)L/5. ducesanemfacrossthecoil.Thevoltagemeasuredbyavolt-
meteracrosstheterminalsofthecoil
Question7
(a) issmallerorlargerthantheemf,dependingonhowfast
A sinusoidal wave is moving along a string of uniform den-
thecurrentchanges.
sity. Ifyoudoublethefrequencyofthewave,
(b) islargerthantheemf.
(a) thewavelengthofthewavedoubles.
(c) isequaltotheemf.
(b) thespeedofthewavedoubles.
(d) issmallerthantheemf.
(c) thespeedofthewaveremainsaboutthesame.
(d) theperiodofthewavedoubles. Question13
Three blocks of identical mass are connected by strings as
Question8 shown below. The whole system is accelerated to the right
Twopoint-charges,eachwithachargeof+1µC,liesomefi- alongafrictionless,horizontalsurfacebyaforceF. Thenet
forceactingonthemiddleblockis
nite distance apart. On which of the segments of an infinite
line going through the charges is there a point, a finite dis-
tance away from the charges, where the electric potential is F
zero,assumingthatitvanishesatinfinity?
(a) Betweeenthechargesonly. (a)zero. (b)F.
(b) Oneithersideoutsidethesystem. (c)2F/3. (d)F/3.
(c) Impossibletotellwithoutknowingthedistancebetween
thecharges.
Question14
(d) Nowhere.
A spaceship is moving straight toward Earth with its engine
turnedoff.LetM andmbethemassesoftheEarthandofthe
Question9 spaceship, respectively, with R the distance from the space-
Standing on the ground, you are holding with your hand a shiptothecentreoftheEarth. Asaresultofthegravitational
string from which is suspended a stone. The reaction force, force of the Earth, in moving from position 1 to position 2,
associated—inthesenseofNewton’s3rdlaw—withtheforce thekineticenergyofthespaceshipincreasesby
ofEarth’sgravityonthestone,istheforceexertedby GMm(R −R ) GMm(R −R )
2 1 1 2
(a) . (b) .
(a)thestringonyourhand. (b)thestoneonthestring. R 1 R 2 R 1 R 2
GMm(R −R ) GMm(R −R )
2 1 1 2
(c)yourbodyontheEarth. (d)thestoneontheEarth. (c) . (d) .
R2 R2R2
1 1 2
2

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2002
Question15 Question19
Two masses, M and M , attached to the end of springs a Inanink-jetprinter,aninkdropletofmassmisgivenanega-
a b
and b, respectively, undergo simple harmonic motion on a tivechargeqbyacomputer-controlledchargingunit,andthen
horizontal, frictionless surface. If the periods of motion are enters at speed v the region between two deflecting parallel
identical,andifM = 2M ,theamplitudesAofoscillation platesoflengthLseparatedbydistanced(seefigurebelow).
b a
ofthetwomassesarerelatedby All over this region exists a downward electric field which
√ you can assume to be uniform. Neglecting the gravitational
(a)A = A / 2. (b)A = A /4.
b a a b forceonthedroplet,themaximumchargethatitcanbegiven
(c)A a = A b . (d)noneoftheabove. sothatitwillnothitaplateismostcloselyapproximatedby
q
E
Question16
v d
Consideracircuitwhichcontainsabatteryandasingleresis-
tanceR.IfasecondresistanceisaddedinparallelwithR, L
(a) thevoltageacrossRwilldecrease.
mv2E mv2d
(b) thecurrentthroughRwillincrease. (a) . (b) .
dL2 EL2
(c) thetotalcurrentdrawnfromthebatterywillincrease. md m(vL)2
(c) . (d) .
E(vL)2 Ed
(d) thepowerdissipatedinRwilldecrease.
Question20
Question17 Fourverylongstraightwirescarryequalelectriccurrentsin
the +z direction. They intersect the x–y plane at (x,y) =
StarshipEnterpriseisinacircularorbitofperiod300minutes
(−a,0), (0,a), (a,0), and (0,−a). The magnetic force ex-
around planet Thera at an altitude of 1000 km. A Klingon
ertedonthewireatposition(−a,0)isalong
spaceship then enters another circular orbit around Thera at
analtitudeof19000km. Therahasaradiusof5000km. The (a)+y. (b)−y.
KlingonspaceshipcirclesTherain
(c)+x. (d)−x.
(a)600minutes. (b)1200minutes.
(c)1800minutes. (d)2400minutes. Question21
Two masses, both equal to 100 g, are suspended at the ends
Question18 ofidenticallightstringsoflength‘ = 1.0m,attachedtothe
samepointontheceiling(seefigure). Attimet=0,theyare
Asimplifiedbolaconsistsoftwo(insteadoftheusualthree)
simultaneouslyreleasedfromrest,oneatangleθ =10◦,the
smallbutheavyballsconnectedtoacommonpointbyiden- 1
other at angle θ = 20◦ from the vertical. The masses will
ticallengthsofstring. Tolaunchit,youholdoneoftheballs 2
collide
overheadandswingtheotherballinahorizontalcircleabout
yourwrist. Youthenletgoofthebolawhichverysoonstarts
rotating around its centre of mass, as shown below. Which
oneofthefollowingstatementsholdstruewhentherotation
q
axischangesfrom(1)to(2)?
q 2
1
(1) (2)
(a) Angular momentum is the same, but angular speed in-
creases.
(b) Angularmomentumandangularspeedremainthesame. (a) atθ =0.0◦,0.50slater.
(c) Angular momentum is the same, but angular speed de- (b) atθ =5.0◦totherightofthevertical,0.16slater.
creases. (c) atθ =0.0◦,0.13slater.
(d) Angularmomentumandangularspeedbothincrease. (d) atθ =5.0◦totherightofthevertical,0.10slater.
3

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2002
Question22 Question24
Two trains are moving toward each other on two parallel Ajet-fighterpilot,wishingtoexperienceweightlessnesscon-
tracks at the same speed with respect to the ground. When ditions, enters a parabolic trajectory closely approximating
the whistle of one train blows, the frequency of the sound thatofaprojectileinfree-fall. Hisaircraftmustflyatamin-
heardbyapassengerontheothertrainwillbe imumspeedof400km/hrtokeepcontrol,andheshouldnot
exceed 600 km/hr so as not to suffer a black-out when he
(a) greatestiftheairisstill.
pullsoutofthetrajectoryattheend. Thereisnowindandair
(b) greatestifawindblowsinthesamedirectionandatthe
resistancecanbecompensatedbytheengine. Inordertobe
samespeedastheothertrain.
weightlessaslongaspossible,heshouldentertheparabolaat
(c) greatestifawindblowsintheoppositedirectionandat anupwardangle(withrespecttothehorizontalground)of
thesamespeedastheothertrain.
(a)33.7◦. (b)41.8◦.
(d) willnotdependonwhetherthereisawindblowing.
(c)56.3◦. (d)48.2◦.
Question23
Question25
InanAfricanwildlifereserveyourjeepistravellingatacon-
stantspeedof105km/hralongsideacheetahrunningatfull Whichoneofthefollowingstatementsisnottrue?Thephase
speed. Theanimal,frightenedbythejeep’snoise,keepsata differencebetweentwolightwavescanchange
constantdistanceof60mfromthevehicle. Nothavingpaid
(a) byreflection.
much attention to the surrounding landscape, you suddenly
realize that your jeep is passing the very same spot where it (b) bythewavestravellingalongpathsofdifferentlengths.
was60secondsbefore. Thespeedofthecheetahis
(c) bythewavestravellingthroughmediathathaveadiffer-
(a)105km/hr. (b)94km/hr. entrefractionindex.
(c)99km/hr. (d)82km/hr. (d) by being transmitted through a boundary between two
mediawithdifferentrefractionindices.
∗ ∗ ∗
PartB
Problem1 toward her. The speed limit for trucks on that road,
whichweshallassumethetruckdriverrespects, is90
Passing a car on a two-lane road requires more caution as
km/hr. The slower car is driving at 100 km/hr. Oth-
speeds increase. Apart from maintaining a safe distance be-
erwise, the same conditions as in part (a) apply. We
tweenvehiclesinthesamelane,thereshouldalsobeenough
assume that for minimal safety she should have com-
spacebetweenoncomingvehicleswhilethepassingmanœu-
pletedhermanœuvreatleast2.0sbeforethetruckand
vretakesplace.
herpasseachother,Butshecannotabortthemanoeu-
Takeallcarsinitially,travellingatthesameconstantspeed,to
vrewithoutbrakingunlessthefrontofhercarisatleast
havealength4.2m. Supposefurtherthatapassingmanœu-
2.0mbehindthebackoftheslowcar, andshecannot
vrestartswiththepassingcaratleast3.0carlengthsbehind
brakesafelybecauseanothercarrightbehindherisalso
thebackoftheslowercar,andthatitendswhenthedriverhas
tryingtopasstheslowcar. Giventhatittakesher1.6s
pulledinwiththebackofhercaratleast3.0carlengthsahead
toreactaftershefirstseesthetruck,discusswhetherit
oftheslowercar(nofish-tailing!).Thepassingcartakes4.0s
is safe for her to continue, or whether she should pull
atconstantaccelerationtoreachitsfinalpassingspeed,which
backbehindtheslowercar(ifshecan!). Ifitturnsout
itkeepsthereafter. Thisfinalspeedis11km/hrgreaterthan
that she is in trouble, could she continue accelerating
thesteadyspeedoftheslowercar.
atthesamerateuptoahigherspeednotexceeding120
km/hr and pass safely while still pulling in three car
(a) Calculate the total time it takes for such a passing
lengthsinfrontoftheslowcar?
manœuvre.
(b) Now suppose that at the instant the passing driver has
reachedherovertakingspeed,shenotices500mahead
(from the front of her car) a very large truck coming
4

CanadianAssociationofPhysicistsPrizeExam 2002
Problem2 Problem3
In Poe’s famous horror tale, The Pit and the Pendulum, the One fine afternoon, as his family watches from some dis-
hero, who finds himself strapped flat to a horizontal sur- tance,amanwalkingbarefootonmoistgroundnearatower
face, notices an almost motionless pendulum hanging from supportingelectrictransmissionlinessuddenlystopsandcol-
the ceiling 12 m above him. After some time, he also real- lapses. Hisrelativescallinemergencyservices,butthesear-
izesthatthependulumisdescendingveryslowlytowardhim rivetoolatetopreventtheman’sdeath.
with,accordingtothestory,theamplitudeoftheswingsand The autopsy reveals that the man’s heart went into ventricu-
the speed at the lowest point in each swing both increasing lar fibrillation, a fatal condition if not stopped very quickly.
inexorably. What is swinging is in fact a small razor-edged His relatives believe that he was electrocuted by some stray
crescentofsteelwhichwilleventuallysweepacrosstheman’s electric current from the tower and sue the power company.
heart. The court orders a forensic investigation to determine if the
Let’s analyze this terrifying situation more closely to see companyisresponsibleforthevictim’sdeath.
if Poe’s spell-binding description actually makes physical The investigation finds that there was indeed an electrical
sense. To do this, we must make some assumptions which fault at the time the incident occurred: for about 1.0 s, an
will not affect our final conclusion. The blade of mass m is electriccurrentof100Aleakedintothegroundfromaverti-
suspended on the end of a massless cable of length l and is calconductingrodwhoseroundedtipwasjustbelowground,
executingsimpleharmonicmotion. Assumethatthebladeis located 10 m away from where the man was standing. The
alsoslowlyloweredinverysmallincrementsoflwhichoccur resistivityofthemoistgroundwasabout100Ω·m.
onlywhenitgoesthroughitslowestpositionineachswing,
atθ = 0◦,whereθistheangularpositionwithrespecttothe (a) Assuming that the current spread uniformly into the
vertical. groundfromtheroundedtip,findthemagnitudesofthe
current density, J (in A/m2), and of the electric field,
(a) Explain in one short sentence why the angular momen- E, as a function of the distance r from the tip of the
tum of the razor at θ = 0◦ remains constant all through rod. Ifyoudon’tknowtherelationshipbetweenJ and
thedescent. E, you can derive it from Ohm’s law and a bit of di-
mensionalanalysis.
(b) Lettheinitiallengthofthecordbel andtheinitialmax-
0
imum speed of the razor be v . Obtain an algebraic ex- (b) CalculateE andJ atthevictim’slocation.
0
pressionforvasafunctionofl.
(c) Underanysuitableapproximation,obtainareasonable
(c) Derive an algebraic expression for the kinetic energy of estimateofthepotentialdifferencebetweentheman’s
thependulumatθ =0◦asafunctionofl. feet.
(d) Makeareasonablesimplyfingassumptionaboutthetotal (d) Itisreasonabletosupposethatthecurrentwentupone
mechanical energy. Find (always as a function of l) the leg of the man, across the torso (and the heart), and
maximumgravitationalpotentialenergyacquiredbythe down through the other leg. The commonly accepted
penduluminagivenswing. values for the resistance of a leg is 300 Ω and that of
a torso 1000 Ω in these conditions. From these data,
(e) Findthemaximumangulardisplacementoftherazorasa
estimatethecurrentacrossthevictim’storso.
functionofl.
(e) Using your expression for E(r), obtain the potential
(f) Discuss the accuracy of Poe’s description of the descent
difference,∆V,betweenthetipoftherodandapoint
ofthependulum.
situated at distance r. Take the tip of the rod to have
radiusa. Iftheintegralisaproblem, youcanstillget
theanswerbynoticingthesimilaritybetweenE(r)and
thefieldofawell-knownchargeconfiguration.
(f) Currents ranging from 0.10 A to 1.0 A across a torso
cantriggerfibrillationintheheart. Couldtheaccident
have been caused by the current that leaked from the
rod?
∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
5

