CAP High School Prize Exam
April 9th, 2013
9:00 - 12:00
Competitor’s Information Sheet
The following information will be used to inform competitors and schools of the exam results, to determine
eligibilityforsomesubsequentcompetitions,andforstatisticalpurposes. Onlythemarkingcode,tobeassigned
by the local examination committee, will be used to identify papers for marking.
Marking Code:
This box must be left empty.
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY IN BLOCK LETTERS
Family Name: Given Name:
Home Address:
Postal Code:
Telephone: ( ) Email:
School: Grade:
Physics Teacher:
Date of Birth: Sex: Male Female
Citizenship:
If not a Canadian citizen, what is your Immigration Status?
For how many years have you studied in a Canadian school?
Would you prefer further correspondence in French or English?
Sponsored by:
Canadian Association of Physicists,
Canadian Physics Olympiad,
The University of British Columbia,
Department of Physics and Astronomy.
1

Canadian Association of Physicists Part A: Multiple Choice
2013 Prize Exam
Each multiple choice question is worth 1 point.
Thisisathree-hourexam. Nationalrankingandprizes Question 1
will be based on students’ performance on sections A A small block of mass m1 is released from rest at the
and B of the exam. Performance on the questions in top of a curve-shaped, frictionless wedge of mass m2
part A will be used to determine whose written work whichsitsonafrictionlesshorizontalsurfaceasshown.
inpartBwillbemarkedforprizeconsiderationbythe When the block leaves the wedge its velocity is mea-
CAP Exam National Committee. Part A consists of sured to be 4.00 m/s to the right as shown in the fig-
twenty-five multiple-choice questions. The questions ure. Ifthemassoftheblockisdoubledtobecome2m1,
in part B span a range of difficulties, and may require what can be said about the speed with which it leaves
graphing. Be careful to gather as many of the easier the wedge?
marks as possible before venturing into more difficult
territory. If an answer to part (a) of a question is
needed forpart(b), andyouarenot able to solvepart
(a), assume a likely solution and attempt the rest of
the question anyway.
Non-programmablecalculatorsmaybeused. Pleasebe
carefultoanswerthemultiple-choicequestionson the
answer sheet provided;mostimportantly,writeyour
solutionstothethreelongproblemsonthreeseparate
sheets as they will be marked by people in different
parts of Canada. Good luck.
a) Its speed is less than 4.00 m/s
Notice: Full marks will be given to a student who
b) Its speed is equal to 4.00 m/s
providesanyfullcorrectsolutiontothelongproblems.
c) Its speed is greater than 4.00 m/s
Partialmarkswillbegivenforpartialsolutions. There
d) Not enough information is given.
are no penalties for incorrect answers. The questions
are not of equaldifficulty. Remember we are challeng-
ing the best physics students in Canada; it is possible
Question 2
that even the best papers may not achieve an overall
Consider the electric charges A, B, C shown in the
score of 80%. This is meant to be tough!
figure below, where q is a positive number. Which an-
swercorrectlydescribesthemagnitudeofthenetforce
experienced by the charges?
Data
Speed of light c=3.00×10 8 m/s
Gravitational constant G=6.67×10 −11N·m2/kg2
Acceleration due to gravity g =9.80m/s2
Normal atmospheric pressure P0 =1.01×105Pa
Density of fresh water ρ=1.00×103kg/m3
Specific heat of water C w =4186J/(kg·K) a) F A >F B >F C
Specific heat of ice C i =2050J/(kg·K) b) F A >F C >F B
Latent heat of water L w =2260kJ/kg c) F B >F A >F C
Latent heat of ice L i =334kJ/kg d) F A =F B =F C
Density of ice ρ i =916kg/m3 e) F A >F B =F C
Fundamental charge e=1.60×10 −19C
Mass of electron m =9.11×10 −31kg
e
Mass of proton m =1.67×10 −27kg Question 3
p
Planck’s constant h=6.63×10 −34Js A long, straight wire carries a current that decreases
Coulomb’s constant 1/(4πǫ0)=8.99×109N·m2/C2 linearlywithtime. Whatisthedirectionoftheinduced
Boltzmann’s constant k =1.38×10 −23J/K electric field outside the wire?
A.U. Astronomical Unit = 1.49598×10 11 m: The ap-
a) Parallel to the current in the wire, in the same di-
proximate distance from the Sun to the Earth.
rection.
Radius of the Earth R =6.371×106m
Radius of the Sun R = E 6.96×108m b) Parallel to the current in the wire, in the opposite
S direction.
c) Pointing radially outward from the wire.
d) Pointing radially inward toward the wire.
e) There is no induced electric field outside the wire.
2

Question 4 was elastic.
A car driven at a constant speed turns left. Which e) No combination of speed values could have caused
force makes the car turn? both balls to stop after the collision.
a) The force of friction, directed towards the left.
b) The force of friction, directed towards the right.
Question 9
c)Theforcewithwhichthedriveristurningthesteer-
ing wheel, directed towards the left. A Ferris wheel is turning about a horizontal axis
d)Theforcewithwhichthedriveristurningthesteer- through its center. The linear speed of a passenger
ing wheel, directed towards the right. sitting on the rim is constant. Which one of the fol-
lowing sentences about the passenger’s acceleration is
correct?
Question 5
Acycliststopspedalingatavelocityv =36km/hand a)Its magnitude atthe highestpointis higherthanat
notices that her bike keeps moving for d = 500 m be- the lowest point, and it is downwards at both points.
foreit stops. The totalmassofthe bike, the bikerand b) Both its magnitude and direction are the same at
her camping equipment is m = 100 kg. What is the the highest and at the lowest points.
average combined force on the bicycle due to friction c) Its magnitude is the same at the highest and at the
and drag? lowest points, but the directions are opposite.
d) Its magnitude at the highest point is smaller than
a) 10 N
atthelowestpoint,anditisdownwardsatbothpoints.
b) 20 N
c) 130 N
d) 260 N
Question 10
A uniform rod is suspended on two thin strings as
Question 6 shownbelow. Which string has a largertension force?
A child is swinging to and fro on a playground swing.
Attheinstantthechainsoftheswingarevertical,what
is the direction of the child’s acceleration?
a) Downwards.
b) Upwards.
c) In the direction of motion.
d) Opposite to the direction of motion.
e) At that moment, the acceleration is zero.
Question 7
Abulletofmass5gisacceleratedinariflebarrelwith
an approximately constant force of 2500 N. The mass
of the rifle is 5 kg. What is the force pushing the rifle
a) The right one
back?
b) The left one
a) 2.5 N c) The tension force is the same on both
b) 2 500 N d) It depends on the angle
c) 2 500 000 N
d) 0 N
Question 11
Question 8 Two point charges −2Q and +Q are placed on the x-
axis with −2Q at x = 0 and +Q at x = a. Which of
Two balls of different masses collide head-on. After
the following statements is true?
the collision, the balls remain at rest, and no external
forcesactonthem. Whichstatementistrueaboutthe
a) There is no point on the x-axis where the electric
speeds of the balls before the collision?
field is zero.
a) They must have been different, and the collision b) There is a point on the x-axis, at x<0, where the
was inelastic. electric field is zero.
b) They must have been different, and the collision c) There is a point on the x-axis, between the charges
was elastic. (0<x<a), where the electric field is zero.
c) They must have been identical, and the collision d) There is a point on the x-axis, at x>a, where the
was inelastic. electric field is zero.
d) They must have been identical, and the collision
3

Question 12 Question 16
In a lab experiment, a laser beam hits a semicircular A girl sitting on a floating mattress in a small pool
glassobjectoffthecentreaxis. Therayentersperpen- holds a model ofa motorboatin her hands. When she
dicularly to the surface, and the environment is air. puts it inthe waterto startdrivingit with herremote
Which ray diagram is correct? control, what happens to the water level in the pool?
a) It rises by a small amount.
b) It drops by a small amount.
c) It stays the same.
d) The qualitative resultdepends on the weightof the
a) b)
model boat.
Question 17
c) d)
WhichoftheaccompanyingP−V diagramsbestrepre-
sentsanisothermalprocess,thatisaprocessoccurring
at constant temperature?
e) f)
Question 13
You put two identical ice cubes on plates of different
materials. Onecube isputonanaluminumplate,and
a) b)
theotheronaglassplate. Bothplateshavebeeninthe
roomfor a long time priorto the experiment. Youno-
ticethattheicemeltsfasteronthemetalplate. Why?
a) The ice is in thermal equilibrium with the plastic
plate, but not with the metal plate.
b) The metal plate conducts heat to the ice more
rapidly than the plastic plate. c) d)
c) The metal plate holds more heat than the plastic
plate.
d) The metal plate was warmer than the plastic plate
initially.
Question 14
e)
Two black objects of the same diameter, a sphere and
a flat disk, are placed in a parallel beam of light. The Question 18
plane of the disk is perpendicular to the beam. What
Two identical objects of mass m are connected to a
can be said about the force acting on them?
masslessstringwhichishungovertwofrictionlesspul-
leys as shown below. If everything is at rest, what is
a) The force is zero.
the tension in the cord?
b) The force is larger on the disk than on the sphere.
c) The force is larger on the sphere than on the disk.
d) The force is the same on both objects.
Question 15
Adriannehasadevicethatemitsphotonswithawave-
lengthofλ=1.498km. Kwanhasasimilardevicethat
emits photons at a frequency of f = 201 kHz. Whose
device emits photons in air at the highest frequency?
a) Less than mg.
a) Adrianne’s b) Exactly mg.
b) Kwan’s c) More than mg, but less than 2mg.
c) The frequencies are the same. d) Exactly 2mg.
d) There is not enough information to compare. e) More than 2mg.
4

Question 19 Question 23
Car A and car B are both traveling down a straight Ahypotheticalplanethasdensityρ,radiusR,andsur-
highway at 90 km/h. Car A is only 6.0 meters behind face gravitational acceleration g. What would be the
car B. The driver of car B brakes, slowing down with acceleration due to gravity at the surface of a planet
a constantdecelerationof 2.0m/s2. After 1.2 seconds, with double the radius, and the same planetary den-
the driver of car A begins to brake, also at 2.0m/s2, sity?
but this is insufficient and the cars eventually collide,
bothstillmovingforward. Whatistherelativevelocity a) 4g
of the two cars at the moment of the collision? b) 2g
c) g
a) 2.4 m/s d) g/2
b) 5.0 m/s e) g/4
c) 9.5 m/s
d) 21 m/s
e) 24 m/s Question 24
You are given two lenses placed close together: a con-
verginglenswithfocallength+10cm,andadiverging
Question 20
lens with focal length −20 cm. Which of the following
Two interfering waves have the same wavelength, fre- would produce a virtual image that is larger than the
quency,andamplitude. Theyaretravelinginthesame object?
direction but are 90 degrees out of phase. Compared
to the individual waves, what can be said about the a) Placing the object 5 cm from the converging lens.
resultant wave? b) Placing the object 15 cm from the converging lens.
c) Placing the object 25 cm from the converging lens.
a) It will have the same amplitude and velocity, but a d) Placing the object 15 cm from the diverging lens.
different wavelength. e) Placing the object 25 cm from the diverging lens.
b) It will have the same amplitude and wavelength,
but a different velocity.
c) It will have the same wavelength and velocity, but Question 25
a different amplitude.
An electromagnetic wave is propagating in vacuum in
d) It will have the same amplitude and frequency, but
the positive z direction. At an instant when its mag-
a different velocity.
netic field B at a certain position is in the positive
e) It will have the same frequency and velocity, but a
x direction and getting stronger, what happens to its
different wavelength.
electric field E at that same position?
a) E is in the positive x direction and getting weaker.
Question 21
b)E isinthenegativexdirectionandgettingstronger.
Aspinningiceskaterhasaninitialkineticenergy 1 Iω2. c) E is in the positive y direction and getting weaker.
2
She pullsinheroutstretchedarms,decreasinghermo- d)Eisinthenegativeydirectionandgettingstronger.
1
mentofinertiato I. Whatishernewangularspeed? e) E is zero.
4
a) ω/4
b) ω/2
c) ω
d) 2ω
e) 4ω
Question 22
A ball of mass m is thrownvertically upward. Instead
ofneglectingairresistance,assumethattheforceofair
resistance has a magnitude proportional to the ball’s
velocity, but pointing in the opposite direction. What
is the ball’s acceleration at the highest point?
a) 0
b) Less than g.
c) g
d) Greater than g.
5

Part B: Problems Problem 3
The luminosity of a star is defined as the energy it
Problem 1
emits per unit time. We know from astronomical ob-
A light emitting diode (LED) is connected in series
servationsthatthe luminosity L ofthe starsthat have
with asuper capacitorofcapacity3000F andinternal
a mass M < 10M is approximately related to their
resistance ∼ 1 mΩ, and a microprocessor-controlled S
mass as:
resistor. The capacitor is charged to 5 V. The LED L M
requires constant current of 800 mA. At this current, =( )
3.5
(1)
L M
S S
the voltage drop over the LED is 2.7 V.
where L and M are the luminosity and mass of the
S S
a) What should be the dependence of the variable re- Sun.
sistor on time for the current to remain constant? Furthermore, we know from Einstein’s theory of rela-
tivity that the energyreleasedfrom convertinga mass
b) What should be the initial value of the resistor? M into energy is given by E =Mc2. In this problem,
Doesthevalueoftheresistorstabilizeaftersometime,
weassumethatallstarsburnalmostthesamefraction
and if so, to which resistance?
of their mass during their active life.
c) How long can the LED operate at full brightness
a) If the fraction of the mass converted into energy is
before the capacitor needs to be recharged?
α ≪ 1, first find an expression for the lifetime of a
star in terms of its mass, luminosity, α and physical
Problem 2
constants.
A light spring with a force constant of 3.85 N/m is
compressed by 8.00 cm and held between two blocks. b) Using the luminosity-mass equation, find the life-
The block on the left has a mass of 250 g, while the time of a star as a function of its mass.
blockontherighthasamassof500g. Bothblocksare
initially held at rest on a horizontal surface, and are c) If we know that the lifetime of our Sun is about 10
thenreleasedsimultaneouslysothatthe springpushes billionyears,whatis the lifetime ofa starwith amass
them apart. M =5M S ?
What is the maximum velocity each block attains if
the coefficient of kinetic friction between each block
and the surface is 0.100 and the coefficient of static
friction is 0.120?
6

Question 1 a b c d e f
Question 2 a b c d e f
Question 3 a b c d e f
Question 4 a b c d e f
Question 5 a b c d e f
Question 6 a b c d e f
Question 7 a b c d e f
Question 8 a b c d e f
Question 9 a b c d e f
Question 10 a b c d e f
Question 11 a b c d e f
Question 12 a b c d e f
Question 13 a b c d e f
Question 14 a b c d e f
Question 15 a b c d e f
Question 16 a b c d e f
Question 17 a b c d e f
Question 18 a b c d e f
Question 19 a b c d e f
Question 20 a b c d e f
Question 21 a b c d e f
Question 22 a b c d e f
Question 23 a b c d e f
Question 24 a b c d e f
Question 25 a b c d e f
7

