CAP High School Prize Exam
April 8th, 2014
9:00 - 12:00
Competitor’s Information Sheet
The following information will be used to inform competitors and schools of the exam results, to determine
eligibilityforsomesubsequentcompetitions,andforstatisticalpurposes. Onlythemarkingcode,tobeassigned
by the local examination committee, will be used to identify papers for marking.
Marking Code:
This box must be left empty.
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY IN BLOCK LETTERS
Family Name: Given Name:
Home Address:
Postal Code:
Telephone: ( ) Email:
School: Grade:
Physics Teacher:
Date of Birth: Sex: Male Female
Citizenship:
Would you prefer further correspondence in French or English?
If you are not a Canadian citizen, what is your Immigration Status?
For how many years have you studied in a Canadian school?
Sponsored by:
Canadian Association of Physicists,
Canadian Physics Olympiad,
The University of British Columbia,
Department of Physics and Astronomy.
1

Canadian Association of Physicists Part A: Multiple Choice
2014 Prize Exam
Each multiple choice question is worth 1 point.
Thisisathree-hourexam. Nationalrankingandprizes
Question 1
will be based on students’ performance on sections A
Consider the electric power dissipation due to resis-
and B of the exam. Performance on the questions in
tanceinacircuit. Whichofthefollowingchangesleave
part A will be used to determine whose written work
the dissipated electric power unchanged?
inpartBwillbemarkedforprizeconsiderationbythe
CAP Exam National Committee. Part A consists of a)Doubling the voltageand reducing the currentby a
twenty-five multiple-choice questions. The questions factor of two.
in part B span a range of difficulties, and may require b) Doubling the voltage and increasing the resistance
graphing. Be careful to gather as many of the easier by a factor of four.
marks as possible before venturing into more difficult c)Doublingthecurrentandreducingtheresistanceby
territory. If an answer to part (a) of a question is a factor of four.
needed forpart(b), andyouarenot able to solvepart d) None of the above.
(a), assume a likely solution and attempt the rest of e) Both (b) and (c) are correct.
the question anyway. f) (a),(b) and (c) are correct.
Non-programmablecalculatorsmaybeused. Pleasebe
Question 2
carefultoanswerthemultiple-choicequestionson the
A U-shaped glass tube closed at both ends and posi-
answer sheet provided;mostimportantly,writeyour
tioned vertically is partly filled with water. At a cer-
solutionstothethreelongproblemsonthreeseparate
tain time the levels of water are different in the two
sheets as they will be marked by people in different
arms of the tube due to a difference in air pressure
parts of Canada. Good luck.
above each arm. If there is no temperature change,
Notice: Full marks will be given to a student who
what will happen to the water level on both sides?
providesanyfullcorrectsolutiontothelongproblems.
Partialmarkswillbegivenforpartialsolutions. There
are no penalties for incorrect answers. The questions
are not of equaldifficulty. Remember we are challeng-
ing the best physics students in Canada; it is possible
that even the best papers may not achieve an overall
score of 80%. This is meant to be tough!
Data
a) The water levels will stay stationary.
Speed of light c=3.00 108m/s
× −11 2 2 b)Thewaterlevelswillequalizerapidly—withinsec-
Gravitational constant G=6.67 10 N m /kg
Acceleration due to gravity g =9 × .80m/s2 · onds.
c)Thewaterlevelswillslowlyequalize—withindays.
N
D
o
en
rm
sit
a
y
l a
o
t
f
m
fr
o
e
s
s
p
h
h
w
er
a
i
t
c
e
p
r
r
ρ
es
=
su
1
r
.
e
00
P0 =
10
1
3
.0
k
1
g/ × m
1
3
05Pa
d) The difference between the levels in each arm will
× increase.
Specific heat of water C =4186J/(kg K)
w
·
Specific heat of ice C i =2050J/(kg K) Question 3
·
Latent heat of water L w =2260kJ/kg Howdoesthemagnitudeofthegravitationalforcewith
Latent heat of ice L i =334kJ/kg which the Moon attracts the Earth compare to the
3
Density of ice ρ i =916kg/m magnitude of the gravitational force with which the
Fundamental chargee=1.60 10
−19C
Earth attracts the Moon?
Mass of electron m =9.11
×
10
−31kg
e
Mass of proton m =1.67 × 10 −27kg a) They are equal.
p
Planck’s constant h=6.63 × 10 −34Js b) The first is greater.
Coulomb’s constant 1/(4πǫ0 × )=8.99 109N m2/C2 c) The first is smaller.
Boltzmann’s constant k =1.38 10
−×23J/K ·
A.U. Astronomical Unit = 1.49 × 598 1011m: The ap- Question 4
× The friction force acting on a bicycle is 20N. What
proximate distance from the Sun to the Earth.
Radius of the Earth R =6.371 106m powerdoesacyclistneedinordertotravelat18km/h?
E
Radius of the Sun R S =6.96 1 × 08m a) 50W
Stefan’s constant σ =5.6704 × 10 −8W/(m2 K4) b) 100W
× ·
c) 1800W
d) 3600W
2

Question 5
What is the average horizontal force acting on a ball
when it elastically bounces off a wall, assuming the
collision time is 0.1s and the momentum of the ball
before the bounce was2kg m/s,perpendicular to the
·
wall?
a) 0.2N
b) 0.4N
c) 40N
d) 20N
Question 6
Asmallexplosionoccursinamodelairplanewhichrips
a) It increases.
it into two pieces. The model was flying with velocity
b) It decreases.
v just before the explosion. Which combination of v1
c) It remains the same.
and v2 are possible velocities of the two pieces after
the explosion? Question 9
Twoidenticalloudspeakers,placedclosetoeachother,
are supplied with the same sinusoidal voltage. One
V can imagine a pattern around the loudspeakers with
alternating areas of increased and decreasedsound in-
tensity. Which of the actions below will not change
the positions of these areas?
a) Moving one of the speakers.
b) Changing the amplitude of the voltage.
c) Changing the frequency.
d)Replacingthe airinthe roomwithagasofadiffer-
ent density.
a) b) c)
Question 10
Two artificial satellites, named Argo and Navis, have
Question 7
circular orbits of radii R and 2R, respectively, about
Three ping-pong balls are electrically charged and are
thesameplanet. TheorbitalspeedofArgoisv. What
arranged in the plane of the page in an equilateral
is the orbital speed of Navis?
triangle as shown below. What is the direction of
the force acting on the ping-pong ball charged with a) v/2
Q3 = 10µC? b) v/√2
−
c) v
d) v√2
e) 2v
Question 11
When someone drags their fingernails across a chalk-
board,aterriblehigh-pitchedsoundisproduceddueto
small bumps in the chalkboard. Assume these bumps
are uniformly spaced by 0.5mm. Audiologists have
determined that humans find sounds in the range of
2 4kHz to be very annoying. An evil teacher wants
∼
to produce the longest duration continuous sound in
thisrangebydraggingherfingernailsacrossthechalk-
a) Towards the top of the page. board. At what speed should she drag her nails to
b) Towards the bottom of the page. accomplish this?
c) Towards the left.
a) 0.28m/s
d) Towards the right.
b) 0.56m/s
e) Another direction.
c) 1.00m/s
d) 2.00m/s
Question 8
In the circuit shown below, the resistance R1 is in-
creased. What happens to the magnitude of the po-
tential difference across R1?
3

Question 12 D D
The Hall Effect occurs when both a current and mag-
netic field arepresentandperpendicular to eachother
in a solid. The result is the generation of an electric
fieldandacorrespondingpotentialdifference(theHall a) t b) t
voltage) across the width of the solid. Suppose a two- D D
dimensional rectangular material carries a current of
0.5A in the positive x direction and is penetrated by
a magnetic field of 1.4mT in the negative z direction.
The number of mobile charges per unit area of the c) t d) t
material is 0.2µC/m2. What is the magnitude of the
Hallvoltage,andthedirectionofthegeneratedelectric Question 16
field? (Assume a right-handed coordinate system)
Which of the following is closest to the thickness of a
piece of paper?
a) 70µV, negative y direction
b) 70µV, positive y direction a) 10 −3m
c) 3.5kV, negative y direction b) 10
−4m
d) 3.5kV, positive y direction c) 10 −5m
d) 10
−6m
Question 13 e) 10
−7m
214Po atoms have a mass of 3.55 10 −22g and decay
210 ×
into Pb with a half-life of 160µs. A detector en-
compassing 1g of 214Po counts the number of 210Pb Question 17
The paper-folding theoremstates that in order to fold
daughters produced. An experimentalist rigs an oscil-
something in half, it’s length must be at least π times
lator so that the frequency of electromagnetic radia-
tion it emits matches the frequency of 210Pb counts its thickness. How many times can you fold a stan-
dardsheetofprintingpaper(0.216m 0.279m)ifyou
measured by detector. After 8ms, what type of elec- ×
always fold from the middle of the longer edge?
tromagnetic radiation is produced by the oscillator?
a) 5
a) Radar
b) 6
b) Red light
c) 7
c) Ultra-violet
d) 12
d) X-rays
Question 14 Question 18
To submerge a block of wood which is less dense than A circuit contains nothing but a battery of voltage V
water,oneneedstoexertaforcedownwardwhichdoes wired to three resistors of resistance R. Which of the
a positive amount of work on the block. Which of the followingcannotbethepowerdissipatedinthecircuit
following is correct for this situation to occur? (assuming negligible resistance for the wires)?
a) P =V2/(3R)
a) The work done by the external force is stored as
b) P =3V2/R
potential energy in the block.
c) P =3V2/(2R)
b)Theblockismovingdownward,thereforeits poten-
2
d) P =2V /(3R)
tial energy is decreasing, thus the work done by the
e) All of the above are possible
external force is all converted to heat, due to friction.
c) The work done by external force is all stored as ki-
netic energy in the block. Question 19
d)Thepotentialenergyofthewaterisincreasedwhile Inabinarystarsystemconsistingoftwostarsofequal
the potential energy of the block is decreased. mass, where is the gravitational potential equal to
e) The total energy of the block is conserved. zero? Assume that for a single star in empty space,
f)Thetotalenergyoftheblockandwaterisconserved. the potential is zero at infinity.
a) Exactly halfway between the stars.
Question 15
b) Along a line bisecting the line connecting the stars
In 1929,Edwin Hubble discoveredthat the universe is
and perpendicular to the plane of the stars’ orbit.
expanding. He observed that galaxies far away from
c) Infinitely far from the stars.
us are moving away at a speed that is proportional to
d)Atanypointonaplanebisectingthelineconnecting
their distance from us (you can assume the constant
the stars and perpendicular to the plane of the stars’
of proportionality is time-independent). For a galaxy
orbit.
thatobeysHubble’slaw,whichofthefollowingcanbe
the graph of distance (from Earth) versus time? For
each plot, t=0 corresponds to the present.
4

Question 20 A
In Young’s double-slit experiment, both slits are illu-
minated by a laser beam and the interference pattern
isobservedonascreen. Iftheviewingscreenismoving
B C
farther from the slits, what will happen to the inter-
ference pattern?
a)The pattern gets brighter.
b)Thepatterngetsbrighterandthefringesmovecloser
to each other and to the central fringe.
c)The pattern gets brighter and the fringes move far-
ther from the central fringe and from each other.
d)The pattern gets less bright and fringes appear far-
ther apart. a) A quarter as much.
e)There is no change in the pattern. b) Half as much.
f)The pattern becomes unfocused. c) The same.
d) Twice as much.
e) Four times as much.
Question 21
A ball is dropped to the Earth from a height of 2m. Question 24
Neglecting the air resistance, which one of the follow- Aboxsitsonahorizontalsurfacethatexertsanormal
ing graphsrepresentsthe kinetic energyof the ball vs. force N on the box. You apply a horizontalforce to it
time? and it does not move. If youhad applied a force twice
as large, it still would not have moved. Let µ be the
s
coefficient of static friction of the surface. While you
KE/J KE/J are applying your initial force, which of the following
is true of the force of friction acting on the box?
a) F =0
f
b) F <µ N
f s
a) T/s b) T/s c) F f ≤ µ s N
KE/J KE/J d) F f =µ s N
e) F µ N
f s
≥
f) F >µ N
f s
c) d) Question 25
T/s T/s
Which of the following is closer to the dimensions of
a solar cell panel that can produce enough energy for
a family in Vancouver in summer time? The following
Question 22
information might be useful:
What will happen to the magnitude of the optical
The price ofresidentialelectricity in BritishColumbia
power of a lens when it is placed in water (n = 1.33)
isapproximately6.90centsperkWh. Atypicalhouse-
compared to its power in the air (n=1)?
hold’s monthly electricity bill is $40 in the summer.
Thepowerperareafromsunlightthatreachesthecity
of Vancouver is about 0.5kW/m2 (averaged over 24
a)It will increase. hours) during the period of June-September.
b)It will decrease. The efficiency of a typical solar cell is about 20%.
c)It will stay the same.
a) 30cm 30cm
d)It will depend on whether the lens is converging or ×
b) 3m 3m
diverging. ×
c) 30m 30m
×
d) 300m 300m
×
e)The sizeofthepanelmustbemuchbiggerthanany
Question 23 of these numbers, since it is always cloudy in Vancou-
The three electric heaters in the following circuit all ver and the city does not get enough sunshine!
have the same resistance. Given that the total heat
emitted by a heater is proportional to the power dis-
sipated, the total heat produced by B and C together,
compared with the heat produced in A, is:
5

Part B: Problems
Problem 1
Whenanobjectsbreaks,manyofthe molecularbonds
get detached, but in this process, some of the energy
that caused the break turns into heat and sound wave
energy.
In this problem we want to understand what percent-
ageoftheenergythatcausesabreakisactuallyusedto
break the molecular bondings. As a simple model we
can think of glass as a cubical structure, which means a) What was the average speed of the “tooth” in one
each SiO2 molecule occupies a cube of side length a, of the expansion joints?
andeachcubicmoleculesitehas1bondingwitheachof
b) At 6in the morning a piece of tire rubber fell into
its neighbouring cubes. The energy required to break
a crack in front of one of the “fingers”, filling it com-
this bond is called bonding energy, denoted by E .
b pletely. The rubber was 10cm long and had a cross
Furthermore, in this problem we are only interested section of 4cm2. What was the force acting on the
in the order of magnitude of the values we obtain.
rubber along its length at 2 PM?
The following image shows a piece of glass of dimen-
sions 25mm 75mm 1mm that is fallen down from c) What will be the vertical force needed to pull this
a height 150 × cm and b × roken into pieces. piece of rubber vertically to remove it?
Clearly state all the assumptions that youmade while
solving this problem. Data: The elastic constant of
such a piece of rubber compressed along its length is
28N/m. Thecoefficientoffrictionbetweenthe rubber
and steel is 0.35. The linear Expansion coefficient of
steel 13 10
−6K −1.
The linear Expansion coefficient
of rubbe
×
r 77 10
−6K −1.
×
Problem 3
Aplanetwithoutatmosphereinorbitaroundastarra-
diates away an amount of energy equal to the amount
ofenergyitreceivesfromthestar. Therefore,theaver-
a)Usingthe image,estimate the totallengthofcracks
age surface temperature of the planet is constant over
and thereby the total number of broken bonds.
decades. Imagine an Earth-sized planet without at-
b) Using the latent heatof vaporizationfor glass,esti-
mosphere orbiting around a Sun-sized star (with the
mate the bonding energy of glass.
sameradiationpowerasthesun)atadistanceof1AU
c) What percentage of the energy in this collision is (AU is the AstronomicalUnit, equal to the Earth-Sun
used to break the bonds? distance).
Numerical Values:
a) What portion of the energy radiated by the star is
captured by the planet? (Assume that planet absorbs
3
Density of glass: ρ g =2g/cm all the energy it receives)
•
b)AccordingtoStefan-Boltzmann’slaw,thepowerper
•
Molecular mass of SiO2: M
SiO2
=60g/mol
area emitted from the surface of an object at temper-
ature T is I = σT4 for which σ is Stefan’s constant.
Assuming the power output of the star is the same as
Latent heat of Vaporization for glass: L =
• g theSun(3.85 1026W),findthesurfacetemperatureof
10kJ/g
×
the planet. Compare this result to the averagesurface
temperature of the Earth (288K). How much differ-
ence does the atmospheremake inthe surface temper-
Problem 2
ature of Earth? Would Earth be warm enough to be
ThemainspanoftheLionGateBridgehasalengthof habitableforhumansifitdidnothaveanatmosphere?
473m. Oneachendthere arethe expansionjoints like
the one on the photo below. They allow the span to c) Neptune is the outer-most planet in our solar sys-
expand horizontally without warping the steel frame tem at distance 30.4AU. If we assume that Nep-
of the span. One day the temperature in Vancou- tune absorbs all the energy it receives from the Sun,
ver changed from 4 to +15 degrees between 6in the whatistheaverageuniformsurfacetemperatureofthis
−
morning and 2in the afternoon. planet?
6

Question 1 a b c d e f
Question 2 a b c d e f
Question 3 a b c d e f
Question 4 a b c d e f
Question 5 a b c d e f
Question 6 a b c d e f
Question 7 a b c d e f
Question 8 a b c d e f
Question 9 a b c d e f
Question 10 a b c d e f
Question 11 a b c d e f
Question 12 a b c d e f
Question 13 a b c d e f
Question 14 a b c d e f
Question 15 a b c d e f
Question 16 a b c d e f
Question 17 a b c d e f
Question 18 a b c d e f
Question 19 a b c d e f
Question 20 a b c d e f
Question 21 a b c d e f
Question 22 a b c d e f
Question 23 a b c d e f
Question 24 a b c d e f
Question 25 a b c d e f
7

