CAP High School/CEGEP Prize Exam
April 5, 2023
9:00 - 12:00
Student Information Sheet
The following information will be used to inform students and schools of the exam results, to determine eligibility
for some subsequent competitions and for statistical purposes. Only the marking code, to be assigned by the local
examination committee, will be used to identify papers for marking.
Marking Code:
This box must be left empty.
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY IN BLOCK LETTERS
Student First Name
Student Last Name
Teacher Name
Address: (StreetnumberandApt)
(CityandProvince) (PostalCode)
Telephone: ( ) Email:
School: Grade:
Date of Birth:
Gender: Citizenship:
If you are not a Canadian citizen, what is your Immigration Status?
For how many years have you studied in a Canadian school?
Would you prefer further correspondence in French or English?
By signing this page I agree that, if my score on this Exam is in the top 20 nationally or in the top 6 in my province,
my name, my school’s name, and my ranking can be published.
Student’s signature:
1

Sponsored by: 1 eV ≈ 1.602×10−19 J
Electrostaticconstantk =1/4πϵ =8.99×109N·m2/C2
0
Permittivity of free space ϵ =8.854×10−12 C2/N·m2
Canadian Association of Physicists; 0
Boltzmann’s constant k =1.38×10−23 J/K
Canadian Physics Olympiad; B
Stefan–Boltzmann constant σ =5.67×10−8 W/m2· K4
Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Astronomical Unit (approximate distance from the Sun
University of British Columbia. to the Earth) 1 AU =1.49598×1011 m
Radius of the Earth R =6.371×106 m
E
Radius of the Sun R =6.96×108 m
S
Mass of the Earth 5.97×1024 kg
2023 Canadian Association of Physicists Mass of the Sun 1.99×1030 kg
Highschool/Cegep Prize Exam H Molar mass 2.016 g/mol
2
O Molar mass 31.998 g/mol
2
This is a three-hour exam. National ranking and prizes N Molar mass 28.013 g/mol
2
willbebasedonstudents’performanceonsectionsAand
B of the exam. Performance on questions in section A
willbeusedtodeterminewhosewrittenworkinsectionB
will be marked for prize consideration by the CAP Exam Section A
National Committee. Section A consists of 25 multiple-
choicequestions. ThequestionsinsectionBspanarange
1) An aluminum wire of varying thickness is pulled at
of difficulty, and may require graphing and/or measure-
each end with a force of 30 N. Which of the following
ment on the graph. Be careful to gather as many of the
statements is true? Note: tension is a force that tends to
easier marks as possible before venturing into more diffi-
stretch something, and stress is the force per unit area.
cult territory. When you are unable to solve any part of
a question, you may assume a likely answer to that part
a) The tension is 60 N all along the wire, and stress is
and attempt the rest of the question anyway.
constant along the wire
Non-programmable calculators may be used. Answer the
multiple-choice questions on the answer sheet pro-
vided. Most importantly: write your solutions to the b) The tension is 60 N all along the wire, and stress
three long problems on three separate sheets as they varies along the wire
will be marked by people in different parts of Canada.
Good luck. c) The tension is 30 N all along the wire, and stress is
Notice: Fullmarkswillbegiventostudentswhoprovide constant along the wire
full correct solutions to problems in Section B. Partial
marks will be given for partial solutions. There are no d) The tension is 30 N all along the wire, and stress
penalties for incorrect answers. The questions are not of varies along the wire
equal difficulty. Remember that we are challenging the
best physics students in Canada; it is possible that even 2) A 1kg object slides 3.6 m down a ramp with a 35◦
the best papers may not achieve an overall score of 80%. slope. It has an initial speed of 2 m/s and a final speed
This Exam is meant to be challenging! of 1.06 m/s when it reaches the bottom. What was the
work done by kinetic friction (µ =0.3) when the object
k
Data
has slid to the bottom of the ramp?
Speed of light c=3.00×108 m/s
a) 10.6 Nm
Speed of sound in air = 343 m/s
Gravitational constant G=6.67×10−11 N·m2/kg2
Acceleration due to gravity g =9.81 m/s2 b) 21.7 Nm
Standard atmospheric pressure P =1.01×105Pa
0
Density of fresh water ρ=1.00×103 kg/m3 c) 0 Nm
Density of ice ρ =916 kg/m3
i
Specific heat of water C =4186 J/(kg·K) d) 19.6 Nm
w
Specific heat of ice C =2050 J/(kg·K)
i
Latent heat of water L =2260 kJ/kg 3) After swinging on a vine in the jungle, monkey A
w
Latent heat of ice L =334 kJ/kg releases the vine and simultaneously drops his banana.
i
Fundamental charge e=1.60×10−19 C Monkey B is stationary on the ground below, watching
Mass of an electron m =9.11×10−31 kg intently. Immediately after the banana is dropped, what
e
Mass of a proton m =1.67×10−27 kg is the direction of the velocity of the banana from each
p
Planck’s constant h=6.63×10−34 J·s monkey’s frame of reference?
2

a) Throw it upwards (v )
A
b) Throw it horizontally (v )
B
c) Throw it downwards (v )
C
d) A and C produce a faster final speed than B
e) A, B, and C all produce the same final speed
5)AveryheavyboxofmassM isbeingliftedupwardsby
a crane at a constant velocity u. A ball of mass m≪M
is thrown at the box with velocity v at angle α.
a)
b)
If the ball hits the box at some time t, what are the x
c)
andy componentsofthevelocityoftheball(v (t),v (t))
x y
after the collision? Assume a perfectly elastic collision.
a) (−vcosα, |vsinα−gt|)
b) (−vcosα,−|vsinα−gt|)
c) (−vcosα, 2u+|vsinα−gt|)
d) d) (−vcosα, 2u−|vsinα−gt|)
e) Either a or b.
f) Either c or d.
4) A very smart bird is sitting on a roof holding a shell
6) A sphere of mass 0.2 kg is suspended from the ceiling
in its beak. It wants to throw the shell so that it hits the
by a light spring whose force constant is 3.2 N/m. It is
ground with the highest speed possible. Assuming air re-
projected vertically downwards with a speed of 0.5 m/s
sistance is negligible, and initial speed is constant in all
from its equilibrium position. What would be its maxi-
scenarios (v =v =v ), how should the bird throw the
A B c
mum acceleration in subsequent motion?
shell so that its final speed before hitting the ground is
greatest? a) 2.0 m/s
3

b) 8.0 m/s d) Depends on the radius of the circle
c) 10.0 m/s e) Both c and d.
d) 12.0 m/s
10) Negative charge is uniformly distributed on a semi-
circular plastic rod. What is the direction of the electric
7)
field strength at point S?
A B C
AblockacceleratesuniformlyalongastraightlinefromA
toC asshownabove. ItsspeedatpointAisv andthat
A
at point C is v . What is its speed at point B, which is
C
the mid-point between point A and C?
a) 2vAvC
vA+vC
a) A
b) vA+vC
2
b) B
(cid:113)
v2+v2
c) A C
2 c) C
√
d) v v
A C d) D
8) Two charged spheres X and Y are suspended from the
11)Supposethatapositron(charge+e,massm )isfired
e
ceiling by identical strings as shown below. When the
at a non-relativistic velocity v towards a proton (charge
0
system is in equilibrium, the angles between string OX
+e, mass m ) at rest. What is the minimum separation
p
and the vertical is i and that between OY and the verti-
between the two particles as they approach each other?
cal is j. If i > j, which of the following statement must
be correct? a) e2
2πϵ0mev
0
2
O b) e
2πϵ0mev
0
2
(cid:16) (cid:17)1/2
c) e2
i 2πϵ0mev 0 2
j d) e2 me+mp
2πϵ0v
0
2 memp
X
12)Anelectronentersthespaceinsideaninfinitecurrent-
carrying solenoid. The velocity of the electron is parallel
Y
to the solenoid’s axis. The electron will:
a) Deflect outwards
a) Both X and Y carry positive charges.
b) Slow down
b) The charges on X and Y are opposite.
c) Speed up
c) ThemagnitudeofchargesonYisgreaterthanthat
d) Stay parallel to the axis of the solenoid
on X.
d) The mass of Y is larger than that of X. 13) An ion follows a circular path in a uniform magnetic
field. Which single change increases the radius of the
9) When two ends of a circular uniform wire are joined path?
to the terminals of a battery, what is the strength of the
magnetic field at the center of the circle? a) Decrease the mass of the ion
a) Zero b) Decrease the charge of the ion
b) Infinite c) Decrease the speed of the ion
c) Depends on the amount of e.m.f. applied d) Increase the magnetic flux density of the field
4

14)Thenumberoffieldlinescrossingagivenareaisgiven
by the electric flux. For a closed surface (like a cube or
sphere) the total electric flux is given by Gauss’s law:
Electric flux through a closed surface=Q/ϵ , (1)
0
where Q is the net charge inside the closed surface. A
What is the output voltage V ?
point charge Q=24q is placed somewhere inside a cube. out
The electric flux through the bottom surface of the cube
is measured to be ϕ = 3.98q. What is the approximate
ε0
location of the charge?
a) Slightly off center.
b) Slightly off center, towards the top surface.
c) Slightly off center, towards the bottom surface.
d) Far from the center, closer to the bottom surface.
e) At the center of the cube.
15)
a) a
b) b
c) c
d) d
17) One mole of an ideal gas (C = 5R/2) in a closed
p
cylindrical piston is expanded from T =300 K, P =0.5
i i
MPa to P =0.1 MPa by an adiabatic pathway. The en-
f
ergysuppliedtothesystem∆Q,changeininternalenergy
∆U, and work done by the gas ∆W are:
Consider an infinite grid made of identical wires of resis-
tance 1 Ω. The equivalent resistance between two adja-
a) ∆U=0 J, ∆Q=4014 J, ∆W =-4014 J
cent points A and B is R . If the wire connecting A
AB
and B (marked with x) is cut, R : b) ∆U=-4270 J, ∆Q=0 J, ∆W =4270 J
AB
a) will increase. c) ∆U=4270 J, ∆Q=0 J, ∆W =-4270 J
b) will decrease. d) ∆U=-5487 J, ∆Q=0 J, ∆W =-5487 J
c) will not change. e) ∆U=-5487 J, ∆Q=-5487 J, ∆W =0 J
d) will become zero. 18) A plate is filled with a layer of water and a lit candle
is placed in the centre. A cup is overturned and placed
e) will become infinity.
to fully cover the candle. The flame is extinguished, and
f) can not be determined. the cup seems to ‘drink the liquid’ — the water is sucked
from the plate into the cup.
16) A diode conducts current only when the potential of
pointAishigherthanthepotentialofpointB,otherwise
it doesn’t allow the current to pass. When it conducts,
the voltage drop across an ideal diode is zero.
Consider a circuit with an ideal diode as shown below. Recall that PV =nRT. Which of the following explains
The input voltage V is shown on the left. why the cup sucks up the liquid?
in
5

a) T decreases so V decreases a) 0.47 g/cm3
b) P decreases so V decreases
b) 0.94 g/cm3
c) n decreases so V decreases
d) n decreases so P decreases c) 1.41 g/cm3
e) T decreases so P decreases
d) 4.23 g/cm3
19) An ideal gas goes through a process such that
PV3 =const. 22) A light beam with two monochromatic components
X and Y passes into a glass block and splits into two
If the volume doubles during this process the tempera- monochromatic beams when it comes out of the glass
ture: block. If the frequency of component X is smaller than
that of Y, which of the following ray diagrams is correct?
a) remains constant.
b) increases four-fold.
c) decreases four-fold.
d) increases eight-fold.
e) decreases eight-fold.
20) The temperature of a gas is increased by the same
a)
amount in two difference processes.
glass
Process A: The volume is kept constant.
Process B: The pressure is kept constant. Y
X
Which of the following is correct?
a) The heat required in process A is greater.
b) The heat required in process B is greater.
c) The same heat is required in both cases.
d) The change in entropy is the same for both pro-
cesses.
e) The change in internal energy is the same for both b)
processes.
glass
f) c, d and e.
X
21) Sodium has a crystal structure (right) which can be
Y
thought of as a repetition of a unit cell shown on the
left. The different colors just represent different relative
positions in the unit cell.
c)
glass
Y
Given that sodium’s unit cell is a cube with edge a =
X
0.428 nm and its atomic weight is 23 g/mol, what is the
density of sodium?
6

d)
glass
X
Y
23) A photocell emits electrons when it is illuminated
with green light. We are uncertain whether it emits elec-
trons when it is illuminated with:
a) ultra-violet radiation
b) X-rays
c) red light
d) blue light
24)OneofthetwoslitsinaYoung’sexperimentispainted
oversothatittransmitsonlyone-halftheintensityofthe
other slit. As a result:
a) The fringe system disappears
b) The bright fringes get brighter and the dark ones
get darker
c) The bright fringes get dimmer
d) The dark fringes get brighter
e) The dark fringes get brighter and the bright ones
get darker
25) A double slit system is located in water (n =1.33).
w
What is the approximate spacing between two bright
fringes? Assume that R ≫ d and that λ is the wave-
length in vacuum.
a) λd
Rnw
b) λRnw
d
c) λR
dnw
d) λR
d
End of Section A
Section B starts on next page
7

1)
m
a
m
b
A turtle is pulling two stacked boxes as shown in the above figure. The string attached to the bottom box is parallel
to the ground. The mass of the bottom box is m and that of the top box is m . The tension in the string is T.
b a
The coefficient of static friction between the bottom box and the ground is µ and that between the two boxes is µ .
b a
Find the range of T with sufficient justification and mathematical reasoning when:
a) two boxes are static
b) the bottom box is moving relative to the ground with the box on top resting on it
c) the bottom box is moving relative to the ground but there is also relative motion between the top and the
bottom box
8

2)
A linear accelerator is a machine used to deliver radiation therapy to cancer patients. It shoots very precise beams
of high energy photons into the patient’s body, and those photons interact with electrons and atoms in the cancer
cells to kill it. There are several different ways a photon can interact with electrons and atoms. In this question,
we’re going to explore a Compton interaction between a photon and an electron. Historically accepted relativistic
equations are provided1.
The electron is originally at rest, has a mass m and energy m c2. An incoming photon with energy hc and
o o λ
momentum h, where λ is the wavelength of the photon, collides with this electron and transfers some of its energy,
λ
which causes the electron and the photon to scatter in different directions. The ejected electron is now travelling at
speed v and has a mass m= mo and energy mc2.
(cid:113) 1−v2
c2
Derive an equation that relates the wavelength (λ) of the incoming photon with the wavelength (λ’) of the out-
going scattered photon and its scattering angle (θ).
Hint: sin2θ+cos2θ =1
Before collision After collision
Scattered photon
Incoming photon
θ
Electron (at rest)
φ
Scattered electron
1Itisimportanttonotethatthehistoricallyacceptedequationsfortherelativisticmassofanelectronthatareprovidedherearenot
properlycorrect. Theyimplythatmasschangeswithvelocity,wheninfactmassisinvariant. Theproperequationsofrelativisticmass
aremuchmorecomplexandarenotneededtosolvethisproblem;thecorrectsolutioncanbefoundwiththeequationsprovided.
9

3)
Onewayofmeasuringdistanceusingopticsistosendalaserbeamtotheobjectandmeasuretheanglethescattered
light makes with the original beam as shown below:
The components inside the dashed line box form the optical distance sensor. The vertical rectangle represents a
linear light sensor, which measures the point of impact of the returning beam. The three lines indicate light rays
reflected from objects at different distances.
The linear sensor is 9 mm long and consists of one line of 600 pixels spaced 15 µm apart.
The slit for the returning beam is 20 µm wide and is located 5 mm above the laser beam and 2 mm away from the
linear sensor. The last pixel of the linear light sensor, the one closest to the laser beam is 15 µm above the slit.
What is the shortest and longest distance this sensor can measure in air?
If we want to measure the distance to an object underwater, two pixels of the linear sensor will be activated: one
correspondingtothelaserscatteringoffthewatersurfaceandonecorrespondingtothelaserscatteringofftheobject.
Explain how one can use these two readings to get the proper distance to the object underwater.
Start with the case when the laser beam is perpendicular to the water surface:
10

Question 1 a b c d e f
Question 2 a b c d e f
Question 3 a b c d e f
Question 4 a b c d e f
Question 5 a b c d e f
Question 6 a b c d e f
Question 7 a b c d e f
Question 8 a b c d e f
Question 9 a b c d e f
Question 10 a b c d e f
Question 11 a b c d e f
Question 12 a b c d e f
Question 13 a b c d e f
Question 14 a b c d e f
Question 15 a b c d e f
Question 16 a b c d e f
Question 17 a b c d e f
Question 18 a b c d e f
Question 19 a b c d e f
Question 20 a b c d e f
Question 21 a b c d e f
Question 22 a b c d e f
Question 23 a b c d e f
Question 24 a b c d e f
Question 25 a b c d e f
11

