CAP High School/CEGEP Prize Exam
April 10, 2024
9:00 - 12:00
Student Information Sheet
The following information will be used to inform students and schools of the exam results, to determine
eligibility for some subsequent competitions and for statistical purposes. Only the marking code, to be
assigned by the local examination committee, will be used to identify papers for marking.
Marking Code:
This box must be left empty.
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY IN BLOCK LETTERS
Student First Name
Student Last Name
Teacher Name
Address: (StreetnumberandApt)
(CityandProvince) (PostalCode)
Telephone: ( ) Email:
School: Grade:
Date of Birth:
Gender: Citizenship:
If you are not a Canadian citizen, what is your Immigration Status?
For how many years have you studied in a Canadian school?
Would you prefer further correspondence in French or English?
By signing this page I agree that, if my score on this Exam is in the top 20 nationally or in the top 6 in my
province, my name, my school’s name, and my ranking can be published.
Student’s signature:

Sponsored by:
Specific heat of water C =4186 J/(kg·K)
w
Specific heat of ice C =2050 J/(kg·K)
i
Latent heat of water L =2260 kJ/kg
Canadian Association of Physicists; w
Latent heat of ice L =334 kJ/kg
Canadian Physics Olympiad; i
Fundamental charge e=1.60×10−19 C
Department of Physics and Mass of an electron m =9.11×10−31 kg
e
Astronomy, University of British Mass of a proton m =1.67×10−27 kg
p
Columbia. Planck’s constant h=6.63×10−34 J·s
1 eV ≈ 1.602×10−19 J
Electrostatic constant k = 1/4πϵ = 8.99×109N ·
0
m2/C2
2024 Canadian Association of Permittivityoffreespaceϵ =8.854×10−12C2/N·m2
0
Physicists Highschool/Cegep Prize Boltzmann’s constant k =1.38×10−23 J/K
B
Exam Stefan–Boltzmann constant σ = 5.67×10−8 W/m2·
K4
This is a three-hour exam. National ranking and
Astronomical Unit (approximate distance from the
prizeswillbebasedonstudents’performanceonsec-
Sun to the Earth) 1 AU =1.49598×1011 m
tionsAandBoftheexam. Performanceonquestions
Radius of the Earth R =6.371×106 m
E
in section A will be used to determine whose written
Radius of the Sun R =6.96×108 m
S
work in section B will be marked for prize considera-
Mass of the Earth 5.97×1024 kg
tionbytheCAPExamNationalCommittee. Section
Mass of the Sun 1.99×1030 kg
Aconsistsof25multiple-choicequestions. Theques-
H Molar mass 2.016 g/mol
2
tions in section B span a range of difficulty, and may
O Molar mass 31.998 g/mol
2
require graphing and/or measurement on the graph.
N Molar mass 28.013 g/mol
2
Be careful to gather as many of the easier marks as
possiblebeforeventuringintomoredifficultterritory.
Whenyouareunabletosolveanypartofaquestion,
you may assume a likely answer to that part and at- Section A
tempt the rest of the question anyway.
Non-programmablecalculatorsmaybeused. Answer 1. Black holes have a very strong gravitational field
the multiple-choice questions on the answer sheet from which nothing can escape, including light.
provided. Most importantly: write your solutions to Approximately,whatistheradiusofablackhole
the three long problems on three separate sheets having mass equal to the sun?
as they will be marked by people in different parts of Hint: Use Newtonian mechanics.
Canada. Good luck. A. 1.5km.
Notice: Full marks will be given to students who
B. 3km.
provide full correct solutions to problems in Sec-
tion B. Partial marks will be given for partial solu- C. 15km.
tions. There are no penalties for incorrect answers. D. 30km.
The questions are not of equal difficulty. Remember
E. The mass is too small to be a black hole.
that we are challenging the best physics students in
Canada; it is possible that even the best papers may
not achieve an overall score of 80%. This Exam is Solution: The black hole should approxi-
meant to be challenging! mately have escape velocity equal to c
Data 1 2Gm
mc2− =0
2 R
Speed of light c=3.00×108 m/s
2GM
Speed of sound in air = 343 m/s ∴R=
c2
Gravitational constant G=6.67×10−11 N·m2/kg2
Acceleration due to gravity g =9.81 m/s2
Standard atmospheric pressure P =1.01×105Pa
0
Density of fresh water ρ=1.00×103 kg/m3 2. Surface tension is defined as the force per unit
Density of ice ρ =916 kg/m3 length acting on the surface of a liquid. Due to
i
Page 2

the presence of it, the surface of a liquid can be A. 0.5v
0
thought of as having a “stretchy” property like a
B. v
0
piece of rubber. Assume that a soap bubble of
C. 1.5v
radius R has a surface tension T. What is the 0
differenceinpressurebetweenthepressureinside D. 2.5v 0
the bubble and the atmospheric pressure? Note E. 3.5v
0
thatasoapbubblehasbothaninnerandanouter
surface.
A. T Solution: A.
2R When the ball rolls without slipping it’s ve-
B. T
R locity v and angular frequency ω are related
C. 2T by v =ωr. Conservation of angular momen-
R
tum with respect to the contact point to the
D. 4T
R ground:
E. 8 R T 2mr2× v r =mv 0 r
∴ v = 1v Note that we have used parallel
Solution: D 2 0
axis theorem to find the
3. Consider the setup below.
5. The speed of a falling raindrop is 10 m/s. The
weather forecast predicts 10mm of rain in the
next hour. If you go out with an umbrella of
radius 70 cm, approximately what is the force of
the rain hitting your umbrella?
A. 0.0002 N
B. 0.0004 N
C. 0.002 N
D. 0.004 N
E. 0.02 N
F. 0.04 N
Let a ,a ,a be the accelerations of m ,m ,m
1 2 3 1 2 3
respectively. Which of the following is true?
Solution: F. Approximate the umbrella as
A. a =−1(a +a )
1 2 2 3 aflatdisk,andassumethatwhenaraindrop
B. a =−1(a −a ) hitstheumbrellaitisstoppedcompletely(it
1 2 2 3
C. a = 1(a +a ) doesn’t bounce). Then:
1 2 2 3
D. a 1 =a 2 +a 3 dp P Nmv (Ahρ)v
F = = = = (1)
E. a =a −a dt T T T
1 2 3
(cid:18) (cid:19)
h
F. a 1 =−(a 2 +a 3 ) =A ρv =0.04N (2)
T
Solution: A
6. Akitchentowelhangsoffatable. Thecoefficient
4. Aringofradiusr(andmomentofinertiawithre- of friction between towel and table is µ. What is
spect to an axis going through its center of mass themaximumfractionofthetowelthatcanhang
I = mr2) is given an initial velocity v . The before the towel falls?
0
ring slides for a little while and then starts to A. µ
roll. What’s the velocity of the ring when it rolls 1+µ
without slipping? B. 1− µ µ
Page 3

C. 1−µ
µ
D. µ
2+µ
Page 4

9. A mass hangs from the ceiling, held up by two
Solution: A. Let x be hanging fraction. springs in series. The upper spring has spring
Equating F g = mxg to F f = m(1 − x)µg constant k 1 , and the bottom spring has spring
gives the answer. constant k . If the mass is displaced from equi-
2
librium by a small amount x, it has a maximum
speed v. If instead the mass is displaced by x/2,
7. Neglecting air resistance, a baseball player on
what is the maximum speed?
Earth can throw a baseball a distance of 100 m.
A. 1v
Ifgravityis5timesweakeronthemoon,howfar 4
could he throw the ball if he were on the moon? B. 1v
2
A. 20 m C. v
B. 100 m D. k√1+k2 v
2 k1k2
C. 500 m E. k√1−k2 v
D. 2500 m
2 k1k2
F. |k √1−k2|v
2 k1k2
Solution: C. The distance thrown is d =
∆tv where ∆t is the flight time of the ball Solution: B. Because the initial displace-
h
and v is the horizontal component of the ment is small we can treat the resulting os-
h
velocity. From the kinematics in the vertical cillation as harmonic. For a harmonic oscil-
direction we get ∆t=2v v /g where v v is the latorthemaximumkineticenergyisK max =
vertical velocity component and g is the ac-
1mv2whilethemaximumpotentialenergyis
2
celerationduetogravity. Therefored∝1/g, U max = 2 1kx2 where k is the effective spring
so decreasing g by 5 increases the distance constant. Conservation of energy requires
by 5. K max =U max whichmeansthatv ispropor-
tional to x. So decreasing x by 2 decreases v
by 2.
8. You live on the 20th floor of a building with two
elevators, A and B, of the same mass. To go to
floor 20, elevator A accelerates for the first 10 10. A car is speeding up as it goes in a circle. When
floors, then decelerates for the last 10. Mean- itisatthenorthernmostpointofthecircle,what
whileelevatorBacceleratesfor5floors,movesat are the possible directions for its acceleration.
a constant speed for 10 floors, then decelerates
A. Exactly north
for 5 floors. Both elevators complete the trip in
B. Between north and west
the same amount of time. You are environmen-
tally conscious, so you want to take the elevator C. Between north and east
which uses the least electricity. Assume friction
D. Exactly south
in the motors and air drag are negligible. Which
E. Between south and west
elevator should you take?
F. Between south and east
A. Elevator A.
B. Elevator B.
C. Both elevators use the same amount of elec- Solution: E or F. It is going in a circle, so
tricity. it must have a south component of accelera-
tion. If it’s going counterclockwise and it is
D. Can’t say without more information.
speedingup,itmusthaveawestcomponent.
If it’s going clockwise and it is speeding up,
Solution: C. Without drag or friction the it must have an east component.
only energy cost comes from doing work
against gravity. Since both elevators climb
the same height, they do the same amount 11. A regular n-gon is a polygon with n equal edges
of work. as well as equal angles. Positive charges each of
Page 5

magnitude q sit on the corners of a regular 2024- A. The time to hit the screen increases if B in-
gon. Thedistancefromeachchargetothecenter creases.
of the 2024-gon is a. If one of the charges is re- B. The time to hit the screen increases if B de-
moved, what is the magnitude and the direction creases.
of electric field at the center?
C. The time to hit the screen increases if α in-
A. q , directed away from the removed creases
4πϵ0a2
charge.
D. The time to hit the screen increases if α de-
B. q , directed towards the removed charge creases.
4πϵ0a2
C. 1 q , directed away from the removed E. The time to hit the screen is independent of
c
2
h
02
a
4
rg
4π
e.
ϵ0a2
α.
D. 1 q , directed towards the removed
20244πϵ0a2
charge Solution: C. The time to hit the screen de-
E. 1 q , directed away from the removed pends on the component of v parallel to B.
20234πϵ0a2
charge.
D
F. 20 1 234πϵ q 0a2 , directed towards the removed T = vcosα
charge
14. In the following circuit, each resistor has resis-
Solution: B
tance 1 Ω. Find the equivalent resistance of the
circuit between point A and B.
12. In the circuit below each resistor has equal resis-
tance.
Whereshouldabatterybeconnectedsothateach
resistor has voltage equal to the emf of the bat-
tery?
A. Between A and B
B. Between B and C A. 3Ω
2
C. Between C and D B. 6Ω
2
D. Between A and C C. 4Ω
3
E. Between B and D D. 8Ω
3
E. None of these.
F. Between A and D
Solution: C.
Solution: A, B, C or F
Due to symmetry along a vertical line going
through the center and points A and B, the
circuit can be folded in half along this line.
13. Anelectronwithaninitialvelocityventersauni-
In the new circuit all resistor will have resis-
form magnetic field making an angle α with the
tance 1/2. This gives
magneticfieldB. Itthenhitsascreenlocatedat
a distance D form the entrance point. Assuming
4
0<α<900, which of the following statement is R =2.(1/2)+(1/2)||1= Ω
eq 3
true?
Page 6

15. Wires A and B lie in the x−y plane. The wires Solution: D.The current intheloop isde-
carry equal currents in the same direction. A terminedbythenegativerateofchangeofthe
chargedparticlepassespreciselybetweenthetwo magnetic flux through the loop, using the
wires, heading in the +zˆ direction. What hap- right hand rule to define what apositive
pens to the velocity⃗v of the particle over time? current is.Consider theareaenclosed bythe
A. The direction and magnitude change. loop,anddefine thenormal direction toface
upward. With thisconvention themagnetic
B. The direction changes but the magnitude re-
flux through the loop decreases then in-
mains constant.
creases asthemagnet passes through. This
C. The direction remains constant but the mag- means that thecurrent intheloop increases
nitude changes.
than decreases to 0 than ingresses again in
D. The direction and magnitude both remain the opposite direction,thendecreasesbackto
constant. zero. Note that choosing the opposite
directionforthenormalwillresultinthesame
finalconclusion.
Solution: B. There is a non-trivial mag-
netic field, so the particle will change direc-
17. Two charges A and B are held at a fixed dis-
tion. But the speed remains the same be-
tance apart. A material M is placed between
cause magnetic forces don’t do any work.
the charges, where M is either a block of alu-
minum or a block of rubber. M does not touch
the charges. What happens to the magnitude of
16. A permanent magnet is dropped north-first
the electromagnetic force on charge A as a result
throughaconductingloop. Whichdiagramcould
of the presence of the material?
represent the current in the loop as a function
A. Decreases substantially for both materials.
of time? (A positive value indicates a clockwise
current, and a negative value a counterclockwise B. Increases substantially for both materials.
current, when viewed from above.)
C. Remains approximately the same for both
materials.
D. Increases for one material, decreases for the
other.
E. Increases for one material, remains same for
A.
the other.
F. Decreases for one material, remains same for
the other.
B.
Solution: A.Thechargecarriersinthealu-
minum will redistribute to shield charge A
from charge B, thus decreasing the force on
A. The rubber has a dielectric constant sub-
stantially different from the vacuum so that
C.
itwillalsoresultintheforceonAdecreasing.
18. Two permanent magnets A and B are held at a
fixed distance apart. A material M is placed be-
D. tween the magnets, where M is either a block of
aluminumorablockofrubber. Mdoesnottouch
themagnets. Whathappenstothemagnitudeof
theelectromagneticforceonmagnetAasaresult
of the presence of the material?
A. Decreases substantially for both materials.
Page 7

B. Increases substantially for both materials.
Solution: D.
C. Remains approximately the same for both
materials. Since the capacitors are uncharged, there
is almost no voltage difference across them.
D. Increases for one material, decreases for the
This allows a significant amount of current
other.
to pass through the capacitor in the mo-
E. Increases for one material, remains same for mentsimmediatelyaftertheswitchisclosed.
the other. Hence, a large portion of the current flow
F. Decreases for one material, remains same for through D-E-O-A.
the other.
20. In the circuit below, all resistors are identical
Solution: C. Both materials have magnetic with resistance R and all capacitors are identi-
permeabilities very close to that of air, so cal with capacitance C. A battery with voltage
neithermaterialwillsubstantiallychangethe V isconnectedbetweenpointsAandD.Initially,
force on magnet A. the switch isopened and allof the capacitorsare
uncharged. Whichofthefollowingoptionsistrue
a long time after the switch is opened? Assume
19. In the circuit below, all resistors are identical theinternalresistanceofthebatteryisnegligible.
with resistance R and all capacitors are identi-
cal with capacitance C. A battery with voltage
V isconnectedbetweenpointsAandD.Initially,
the switch isopened and allof the capacitorsare
uncharged. Whichofthefollowingoptionsistrue
right after the switch is closed? Assume the in-
ternal resistance of the battery is negligible.
A. Mostofthecurrentonlyflowsthroughallca-
pacitors.
B. Most of the current only flows through resis-
tors OF, FE, and OD.
C. Most of the current only flows through resis-
tors AB, OB, and OD.
A. Mostofthecurrentonlyflowsthroughallre- D. Almost no current flows through any capaci-
sistors. tors.
B. Most of the current only flows through resis-
tors AB, FE, and CD.
Solution: C.
C. Most of the current only flows through resis-
Almost no current flows through the capaci-
tors OB, OF, and OD.
tors when they are almost full. Hence, most
D. Almostnocurrentflowsthroughanyresistor. of the current flows through D-O-B-A.
21. One mole of an ideal gas inside an engine goes
through a process labelled by 1 → 2 → 3 → 1.
The Volume vs Temperature graph during this
process is shown below.
Page 8

23. The gas in the Earth’s atmosphere is more dense
closer to the Earth’s surface. Based on this fact,
wheredoyouexpectthesuntobewhenyoulook
directly at it? (Assume the sun isn’t directly
above you.)
A. Slightly higher than it appears
B. Slightly lower than it appears
C. Slightly right of where it appears
D. Slightly left of where it appears
Consider the following statements:
Solution: B. Treat the atmosphere as a
i. Work done by the gas during 2−3 is zero. spherical shell with a higher refractive index
ii. The pressure during 3−1 is constant. than the vacuum of space. Then light rays
from the sun will bend towards the normal
iii. The total work done by the gas during
as they enter the atmosphere. This means
1−2−3−1 is zero.
that the sun appears higher than it actually
Which of these statements is/are true? is.
A. i
B. ii
24. You want to magnify an ant using a magnifying
C. iii glasswithafocallengthof20cm. Howfarshould
D. i and ii you place your magnifying glass from the ant?
E. ii and iii A. Less than 20 cm
F. i, ii and iii B. Approximately 20 cm
C. More than 20 cm
Solution: D D. It depends on other factors
22. Howdoesincreasingthepressureaffectthefreez-
Solution: A. You want to create a virtual
ing temperature T and boiling temperature T
f b image, so the ant needs to be within the fo-
of most liquids?
cal length of the glass.
A. It decreases T and T .
f b
B. It increases T and T .
f b
25. Two very large mirrors intersect each other at
C. It decreases T and increases T .
f b
the right angle. Suppose, you are standing at
D. It increases T and decreases T .
f b an equal distance from each mirror. How many
images of yourself will you see in the mirrors?
Solution: B. Increasing pressure makes a A. 2
substance more compact. Since solids are
B. 3
generallymorecompactthanliquids,andliq-
uids are more compact than gasses, increas- C. 4
ing pressure means that a liquid will gener- D. 5
ally tend to freeze at a higher temperature,
E. More than 5
and a gas will tend to condense at a higher
temperature.
Page 9

Section B
1. The juggler in the photograph rotates the umbrella in such a way that the disk rolling on the umbrella
stays in the same place in the room reference frame, as shown:
a. The coefficient of a rolling friction C is a property of a rolling object and the surface on which it
rolls. ItisdefinedbytheequationF =CN,whereF isthemagnitudeoftheappliedforcerequired
fortheobjecttorollataconstantvelocity,andN isthemagnitudeofthenormalforceoftheobject
relative to the surface. Make appropriate measurements on the photo and some approximations to
figure out what is the coefficient of rolling friction of the disk over the umbrella material.
Solution:
N =F cosα (2 marks) (3)
g
F =F sinα (2 marks) (4)
g
C =F/N =tanα (2 marks) (5)
α=15±2◦ (1 + 1 marks) (6)
b. Using the photo can you determine the angular velocity of the rotation of the umbrella?
Page 10

Solution: No, withoutdragobjectcanbestationaryatdifferentangularvelocities. (2marks)
Page 11

2. Birefringence is an optical phenomena where a birefringent crystal refracts light in two different direc-
tions, resulting in the separation of a single incident light beam into two polarized rays with different
refractive indices (n and n ). These two rays are often called the ordinary ray (o-ray) and the extraor-
o e
dinary ray (e-ray). Each ray travels through the crystal at a different speed.
Part 1: Refraction from a birefringent crystal
Whenanelectromagneticwavepropagatesinamediumwitharefractiveindexn,thechangeinoscillation
phase after going through a distance d can be expressed as follows.
2πnd
ϕ=
λ
a. Suppose we have a birefringent crystal with thickness d. If a beam of light with a wavelength of λ
propagatesthroughthecrystal,expressthephasedifferencebetweentheordinaryandextraordinary
ray, ϕ, in terms of λ, n , n , and d.
e o
A beam of linearly polarized polychromatic light, whose electric field’s vector makes an angle θ = 45◦
with the x-axis, falls normally on a crystal. The refractive index for the electric field component in the
x-direction is n = 2.647, and the refractive index for the electric field component in the y-direction is
o
n =2.693.
e
b. Write down the conditions for the phase difference, ϕ, that causes the transmitted light to have:
Page 12

i. Maximum intensity
ii. Minimum intensity
c. It is known that the wavelengths for three primary colors are:
– λ = 680 nm
red
– λ = 530 nm
green
– λ = 470 nm
blue
Find the minimum thickness of the crystal, so that the transmitted light:
i. Appears blue.
ii. Appears yellow.
Part 2: Birefringent crystal and polarizers
A polarizer is an optical device that transmits electromagnetic waves with a particular orientation. For
example,alinearpolarizeratθwillselectivelytransmitthecomponentoflightorientedatθasillustrated
in the figure below.
Page 13

Now,ourbirefringentcrystalisplacedbetweentwolinearpolarizers. Thefirst(front)polarizerisaligned
θ = 45◦ clockwise with respect to the y-axis, while the second (rear) one is aligned θ = 45◦ counter-
clockwise with respect to the y-axis as shown in the figure below. An unpolarized light propagates
normally to the first polarizer.
d. Write down the conditions for the phase difference, ϕ, that causes the transmitted light to have:
i. Maximum intensity
ii. Minimum intensity
e. Find the minimum thickness of the crystal, so that the transmitted light:
i. Appears blue.
ii. Appears yellow.
Page 14

Solution:
a. The phase difference between the ordinary and extraordinary rays is proportional to the dif-
ference in optical path length (OPL) of both rays.
2πd
ϕ= (n −n )
λ e o
b. After passing through the first polarizer, the polarized light has equal x and y components of
amplitude with no phase difference between both components.
Hence, the maximum transmitted intensity corresponds to the following condition.
π
ϕ=− +2mπ
2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
λ 1
∆n= 2m−
2d 2
Where m = 0,1,2,..
Usingasimilaridea,theminimumtransmittedintensitycorrespondstothefollowingcondition.
π
ϕ= +2mπ
2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
λ 1
d= 2m+
2∆n 2
Page 15

c. A blue light corresponds to maximum transmission for λ=λ . The minimum value of ∆n,
blue
occurs when m=1
3λ
d= blue =7.663µm
4∆n
A yellow light is a combination of red and green lights, which corresponds to a minimum
transmission of blue light.
λ
d= blue =2.554µm
4∆n
d. Theideausedinpartb. isalsousefultosolvethispart. Thelightshouldbelinearlypolarized
and directed to the polarization axis of the second polarizer to be maximally transmitted and
should be perpendicular to the polarization axis to be minimally transmitted.
Maximum transmission:
π
ϕ= +mπ
2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
λ 1
d= m+
2∆n 2
Minimum transmission:
ϕ=mπ
mλ
d=
2∆n
e. Blue light:
λ
d= blue =2.554µm
4∆n
λ
d= blue =10.22µm
∆n
Page 16

3. Two uncharged 10cm×10cm metal plates, separated by a distance d = 1 mm are just touching the
surface of water as shown in the figure. The electric permittivity of water is 10 times than that of the
air. IfaconstantvoltagedifferenceofV =600V isappliedtotheplates, determinehowmuchthewater
rises inside the plates.
Solution: Before the water level changes inside the plates, the capacitance is
ε lw
C = 0
d
where w and l are the width and length of each plate. Assume the water level changes by a height
h. The new capacitance
ε (l−h)w κε hw
C′ = 0 + 0
d d
ε lw ε hw
= 0 + 0 (κ−1)
d d
since κ > 1 the capacitance increases so does the electrostatic energy of the system (Q = 1CV2).
2
Page 17

We must have
1 1
(C′−C)V2 = mgh
2 2
1ε hw h
0 (κ−1)V2 =(ρwhd)·g·
2 d 2
ε V2
∴h= 0 (κ−1)
ρgd2
Plugging in the numbers gives h≈2.9mm
Page 18

